The Project Gutenberg eBook, Chronicles of an Old Inn, by Andrée Hope


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: Chronicles of an Old Inn
       A Few Words about Gray's Inn


Author: Andrée Hope



Release Date: November 22, 2020  [eBook #63844]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHRONICLES OF AN OLD INN***


E-text prepared by deaurider, Martin Pettit, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made
available by Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/cu31924021676683





CHRONICLES OF AN OLD INN

Or,

A Few Words about Gray's Inn.

by

ANDRÉE HOPE.






London: Chapman & Hall,
Limited.
1887.

Charles Dickens and Evans,
Crystal Palace Press.



Dedicated

BY PERMISSION, AND WITH THE DEEPEST RESPECT,

TO

HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS

THE DUKE OF CONNAUGHT,

Treasurer,

AND TO THE

HONOURABLE SOCIETY OF BENCHERS
OF GRAY'S INN.




PREFACE.

It is with feelings of much diffidence, even with alarm, that this
little book is given to the world. It was written to give pleasure to
many dear to the writer's heart, relatives and friends, most of whom
have already gone to that "Shadowy Land" to which we are all so fast
hastening.

They, alas! can no longer feel an interest in the pages written in
hours of much happiness and of cruel sorrow. Probably the literary
world, of whom the writer stands in trembling awe, will regard with
the same indifference a little work so crude and incomplete. But as
sometimes a rough sketch brings persons and places as vividly to
remembrance as highly finished pictures, perhaps these "In Memoriam
Chronicles of an Old Inn" may, in some degree, interest those who have
not time to read more skilfully written but longer histories.




CONTENTS.

                                                    PAGE
GRAY'S INN                                             1

THE TWO BROTHERS, ANTHONY AND FRANCIS BACON           70

SIR NICHOLAS BACON                                    93

SIR WILLIAM GASCOIGNE                                103

LORD BURLEIGH                                        122

SIR EDWARD COKE                                      140

OTHER EMINENT LAWYERS                                176

STEPHEN GARDINER                                     181

THE CHAPEL                                           231

ARCHBISHOP LAUD                                      241

BISHOP JUXON AND ARCHBISHOPS SHELDON AND WHITGIFT    246




CHRONICLES OF AN OLD INN;

OR,

A Few Words about Gray's Inn, London.

GRAY'S INN.


About half-way down the great thoroughfare of Holborn, there is an old
and somewhat gloomy gateway. That gateway is low and dark, but rarely
silent, as from early dawn until late into the night it echoes and
re-echoes with the thunder of the mighty traffic of the great street on
which it opens.

From early dawn until late into the night may be heard the heavy roll
of omnibuses, the sharp rattle of cabs, the hurried steps of vast
multitudes of foot passengers.

Like the arteries of the living body, that as long as life endures
receives fresh blood from the heart, are the main streets that lead
from "the City," that heart of gigantic London; and from this great
centre of the trade of Europe, the wondrous stream of commerce is for
ever flowing.

Of these magnificent streets few are more striking to the stranger than
the grand old thoroughfare of Holborn.

Its width, its length, the precipitous hill over which it passes, the
noble viaduct that now eases the too rapid descent, the memories that
are connected with this, one of the most ancient, as well as one of
the most important streets of the English capital, render it more than
ordinarily interesting to the foreigner, and to the stranger.

A few of the ancient houses are still in existence, and from their
quaint old casements many royal pageants and many sorrowful processions
have been witnessed.

Kings and Queens arrayed in gorgeous robes, blazing with costly
jewels, and surrounded by glittering courtiers, have gaily moved
onwards amid the blare of trumpets, and the shouts of admiring crowds,
to partake of sumptuous Court festivals.

In awe-inspiring contrast to the gay trains, and to the beauty and
mirth of the pleasure-seekers so joyously riding forward to fresh
delight, other scenes have, alas! been too frequently witnessed from
these same windows.

Amid the derisive cries of a savage rabble, or amid the gloomy silence
of a suffering and oppressed people, other and ghastly processions have
also passed this way.

Merciless guards and black-robed priests are here, and in their midst,
watched with zealous and cruel care, are tottering and emaciated
figures--martyrs on their way to Smithfield, prepared to seal by their
blood the testimony they have borne to the truth of their faith.

Broken down by suffering, with a frame ofttimes racked by the torture
it has undergone, many an heroic heart has still triumphed over the
crushed and mangled body, and with uplifted hands and in fervid accents
the Christian hero, even amidst the flames, praises God, who permits
His faithful servant to testify, though in death, undying love and
confidence in his Divine Father.

God be thanked, however, that these hideous old times have long since
passed away, and that England is now, by her noble tolerance and
enlightened Christianity, doing much to show the world that it is not
by cruelty and persecution that our holy religion requires to be upheld.


Oldbourne, as it was called in olden times, was early one of the
important thoroughfares in, or rather leading to the City of London,
and although the traffic must in days of yore have been but a faint
shadow of what it now is, still even as far back as the reign of
Richard II. it was necessary to make special laws for its good
ordering, by reason of the number of carts, wains, drays, and other
conveyances that passed that way.

One old chronicler complains thus quaintly:

"The coachman rides behind his horses' tails," saith he, "he lasheth
them, but looketh not before nor behind him. The drayman sitteth and
sleepeth on his dray, and so letteth his horses lead him home."

For the better maintenance of safety, it seems that it had been ordered
that the fore horse of every carriage should be led by hand; but we see
that in old days, as indeed is sometimes the case now, such prudent
regulations were but little regarded. So the same old chronicler
mournfully adds: "These wise laws are not faithfully observed."

In these same old days coaches were unknown, but a singular kind of
chariot, or large covered chair, slung upon wheels, and called a
whirlicote, was used by ladies of high rank.

When Richard II. travelled from Kent to London, the King and all his
Court rode on horseback, but the Queen Mother, being weak and sickly,
made the journey in a whirlicote.

A new fashion came in vogue the following year, when King Richard
married Princess Anne of Bohemia.

The fair young Queen made her first appearance in public arrayed in
white robes embroidered in silver, so that "she shone in beauty and
brightness like unto a sweet crescent moon," and to the admiration
of all beholders, she rode gallantly at the King's left hand, seated
sideways on her horse, on a machine called a side-saddle.

From that moment whirlicotes went out of fashion, and every woman who
was young enough to mount a horse rode sideways like the Queen.

But centuries have passed away, each century, each year indeed, adding
to the mighty stream of traffic, and now the roar of passing vehicles,
the hurrying footsteps of thousands of foot passengers, cease not from
early dawn until late into the night.

To the unaccustomed ear, to the unaccustomed eye, such overpowering
noise, such perpetual movement, speedily becomes bewildering and even
stupefying. Ear and eye alike are exhausted by the unwonted strain.

Very few, however, of the many who pass and repass that way, notice the
low, dark archway already mentioned opening on the left-hand side of
the street when proceeding towards the City. Turn down that archway,
and ere twenty steps are made a different world is found. Not only
indeed a different world, but a chance visitor might say with reason
that he is out of the world, the sudden quiet, the sudden peace, is in
such extraordinary contrast to the rush and hurry of the street he has
left.

Instead of the blinding glare, the suffocating dust, the bewildering
noise of Holborn, the quiet court to which this archway leads, rests in
almost monastic calm. Lofty houses intercept the burning rays of the
sun, and cast their soft gray shadows half across the square. Even the
noise of the great street is softened to the ear, and becomes almost
soothing, as the echoes of it fall and are gradually lost amid the
thick old walls.

The maddening hubbub of carts, cabs, and hurrying feet fades into
an indistinct murmur, like the throbbing of the waves of the great
Atlantic when heard far away inland.

To one given to idle and desultory wanderings, and to idle and
desultory thoughts, the quaint old nooks and corners that may often
be found in the midst even of the most populous towns, have far more
charms than the busier haunts of men, for to those who love to muse on
bygone days there is a strange and constantly increasing fascination
in the conventual quiet, the faded grandeur of many of these time-worn
spots.

In truth, however, the old squares of that ancient Inn of Court called
Gray's Inn, though quiet and retired, are by no means gloomy. Not only
are they cool and restful in the glowing days of summer, but in their
pleasant courts some remains may still be found of the sweet country
sights, of the sweet country sounds that centuries ago made the drives
and walks by Oldbourne Hill, with its pretty lanes and paths, and its
fragrant hedgerows, the favourite resort, not only of the tired and
heated citizens of London, but also of the great lords whose stately
palaces were either grouped around Westminster, or stretched far along
the picturesque river-bank then, as now, called the Strand.

No doubt the beautiful and rapidly flowing river had many charms, and
we know from Pepys, that during the summer heats its broad bosom was
covered with pleasure-boats and wherries.

In those days smoke did not darken, nor did evil smells and sights
defile the waters of the sweet Thames. Fair gardens then bordered its
banks, and trees and flowers dipped tendrils and branches into its
waves.

Still, notwithstanding these attractions, the Londoners dearly loved
Oldbourne Hill, where the fresh cool breezes came from the Kent and
Surrey hills laden with the sweet scent of gorse and broom (that
favourite badge of our Plantagenet Princes), and from the valleys and
sunny slopes below came the richer perfumes of innumerable vineyards
and hop-grounds.

It is difficult to realise, while wandering amongst the wilderness
of houses that now surrounds and connects the cities of London and
Westminster, that once fair fields and shady woods extended for miles,
where now are only found grimy streets and dismal courts. Still more
difficult is it to believe that within the last hundred years these
same fair fields were dangerous to traverse after dark, by reason of
the many footpads who infested the neighbourhood.

Beyond St. Pancras Church a bell was rung at stated hours, in order
that foot passengers who wished to cross the meadows towards Hampstead
and Highgate, or go to those suburbs called Camden and Somers Towns,
should have the protection of an armed watchman. In those days few
persons ventured abroad after nightfall without carrying some defensive
weapon. Without gas, without police, London streets as well as London
suburbs were fraught with danger.

Now, when dazzled by the glare of the streets, when wearied by the
overpowering noise of the great town, a shady corner in quiet Gray's
Inn Square seems doubly attractive.

The bright August sun shines fiercely on the opposite pavement. Its
rays glint up and down the façade of the tall houses, here and there
catching the angle of a projecting cornice, then reddening and almost
beautifying some old smoke-blackened chimney.

Many are the beautiful though rarely-noticed spots of colour these rays
bring to light.

Tiny atoms of green moss, and of those other hardy lichens that time
gathers round about old tiles, glow like gems when caught by the
flickering beams. Even the shade-loving lycopodiums, that as years
roll on, softly carpet with their minute sprays all the damp, ugly
spots into which the sun rarely penetrates, even these modest plants
grow brighter and more beautiful as the unwonted warmth and sunshine
steal into their secluded corners. With what delicacy and grace does
not Nature soften and re-colour all the injuries that time and man's
neglect so surely bring about!

As the hours wear on, the restfulness of the old precincts grows more
and more sweet. The subdued roar of the great city rises and falls in
measured cadence, and mingles quite pleasantly with the cawing of the
rooks as they slowly wing their way home from their feeding grounds
near Hampstead and Highgate, wheeling and cawing lazily as they circle
round the old trees ere they settle themselves for the night.

An ancient rookery still exists in the gardens of the Inn, and the soft
evening air, as it sways to and fro the branches of the tall elms in
which the nests have been built, brings with it the delicious scent of
newly-cut grass.

Well may the Benchers love their Inn. In no other place in London
are there so many pleasant reminders of the fair country that once
surrounded these Courts and Halls.

When seated in the gardens under the shade of the ancient trees,
listening to the songs and chirpings of innumerable birds, it seems
really incongruous that in so restful a spot, where so much speaks
of quiet country life, weighty legal matters are for ever being
transacted. Could we penetrate into the secrets of many of the old,
dark houses that frown around, what tales of anxiety, of suffering,
what histories of the trials that blight men's lives would come to
light.

To the doctor and to the lawyer the deadly malady, the heart-crushing
anxiety, must ever be told without reserve. No cruel symptom, no ugly
detail, must be concealed. No man may keep a secret from such advisers.
Lawyers as well as doctors must be told not only the truth, but the
whole often hateful truth.

These old houses could indeed tell many mysterious, many marvellous
tales, but silent as they are, their heavy, solid doorways, their
long, narrow windows, their broad staircases and lofty rooms, are
in themselves a history of the past. They are accurate though mute
evidences of the time when they came into being. A faded grandeur
still hangs about them, for they were built when land was not sold
by the foot as it now is, and space was then a luxury comparatively
easily purchased. So the staircases are broad, and the rooms large and
lofty; but years have passed, centuries have passed, and staircases
and passages have grown dusky and dim, and the handsome rooms devoted
only to the stern purposes of life, and uncheered or graced by the
softening presence of woman, have become shabby and harsh of aspect. So
generation after generation of lawyers dwell here and pass away, each
generation leaving an additional shadow of dusky shabbiness upon the
poor old rooms.

The occupiers of the Inn are for the most part day dwellers only, doing
their work in chambers, and leaving in the evening for their houses
elsewhere.

Some few bachelors, however, make their home here, and when that is the
case, the sets of chambers so occupied are the perfection of comfort.
Those who have the good fortune to know these snug abodes, may well
be eloquent as to their merits. The solid old mahogany tables, the
exquisitely finished Chippendale chairs, are mellow with age, and glow
with the rich gloss produced by much rubbing. Then the fireplaces, so
hospitably deep and ample, where the ruddy flames can so well be seen
as they dart up the great chimneys, casting their light upon the quaint
masks and carvings that adorn the mantel-shelves; they make the ugly
faces laugh as they are caught by the genial light.

The roomy arm-chairs, too, have assumed the cosy hollowness that speaks
of constant use, and look most invitingly comfortable.

During summer the long narrow windows will be opened upon the bright
and sunny garden, where great beds of mignonette and long lines of
sweet-peas make the summer air full of fragrance; and not unfrequently
on a warm, drowsy afternoon may be heard the soothing tones of a
violoncello played by no unskilful hand, and perchance a tender old
melody of Purcell or Glück, or one of the grand harmonies of Beethoven,
adds yet another charm to the peace and restfulness of the place.

In short, in many parts of this pleasant Inn old age has attained that
judicious number of years when men wisely discard mere show, and are
content to seek and obtain intense comfort.

Some of the residents in Gray's Inn are Benchers, and these gentlemen
are not only entitled to chambers, but during Term time an especial
dinner is provided for them in the Great Hall; and as the Society
always numbers amongst its members some of the most distinguished men
of the day, it may readily be understood how interesting and attractive
these meetings are.


Inns of Court were originally so called because the students belonging
to them were bound to attend and serve the Courts of Judicature.

Anciently these colleges received none but the sons of noblemen, and of
those gentlemen whose rank qualified them to do service to the King in
his Court.

Fortescue affirms that in his time there were about two thousand
students in the Inns of Court and of Chancery, all of whom were _filii
nobilium_, or gentlemen born. But the rigidity of this rule was
gradually relaxed, and in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, Sir Edward
Coke reckons that not more than half the students then studying in the
various Inns were of gentle birth.

These Inns of Court, that for centuries have been so justly famed for
the education and introduction of men of learning in the law, are
governed by masters, principals, Benchers, stewards, treasurers, and
other officers.

Amongst their buildings are public halls for exercises, such as
reading, declaiming, reciting, etc. At one time every student was
compelled to attend and take part in these exercises for a certain
number of years before he was admitted to plead at the Bar. At the
present day, however, most of these regulations have fallen into
disuse, and are no longer insisted upon.

The societies have not any judicial authority over their members, but
they have certain orders and rules amongst themselves, which have by
consent the force of laws.

For slight offences persons are excommoned, or put out of commons. For
graver faults they forfeit their chambers, or, indeed, may be expelled
the college. When an offender has been thus expelled, he can never be
received by any of the other societies.

The members of these societies, or Inns, may be divided into Benchers,
outer barristers, inner barristers, and students.

The Inns themselves are divided into, and are severally denominated,
Inns of Chancery and Inns of Court.

The most ancient of the former is Thavies Inn, which was begun in
the reign of Edward III. The other Inns of Chancery are New Inn,
Symond's Inn, Clement's Inn, Clifford's Inn (once the property of
Lord Clifford), Staples' Inn (so called because it had belonged to
the Merchants of the Staple), Lion Inn (formerly an ordinary hostelry
for travellers, bearing the sign of the Lion), Furnival's Inn, and
Barnard's Inn.

Inns of Chancery were, in the earlier centuries, considered as a
preparatory college for the younger students, who could here pursue the
studies that would enable them to be admitted into the Inns of Court.

The four principal Inns of Court are the Inner Temple, the Middle
Temple, Lincoln's Inn, and Gray's Inn.

Gray's Inn formerly belonged to Lord Gray, and Lincoln's Inn to the
Earl of Lincoln. The Inner and Middle Temple, once the dwellings of
the famous Knights Templar, were purchased about three hundred years
ago by the then leading Professors of the Common Law.

There are also two other Inns, those of the Serjeants of the Law.

The general daily life in the Inns of Court during olden times, is
described by Fortescue with much minuteness, and appears to have been
both varied and attractive:

"On working days most of the students applied themselves to the study
of the law, and on holy days to the study of Holy Scripture. At the
same time, however, the students were not allowed to neglect lighter
pursuits, for they learned to sing, and to exercise themselves in all
kind of harmony, and they also made provision for the exercise and
consequent health of the body, for they constantly practised dancing
and other noblemen's pastimes. They did everything in peace and amity."


This last assertion appears somewhat startling in an age when scenes of
brawling and fighting were of almost daily occurrence in the streets of
London. However, it may be presumed that in these old times the heads
of societies, having young men to take care of, did try to take care of
them, and did not leave them quite so much to themselves as is the case
in these modern days.

No doubt, there is much to be said in favour of training boys, as early
as possible, to be self-dependent.

We are proud, and proud with reason, of "Our Boys." Still the most
sanguine amongst us must admit that there is room for improvement in
the system that is adopted in most of our schools and colleges.

It is the fashion now to deem that old heads can be seated on very
young shoulders. These young fellows, scarcely more than children in
years, are left to their own guidance, both morally and physically.

We may indeed glory in our boys in many respects. They are manly,
honourable, brave, and truthful, with a truthfulness that makes many a
parent's heart beat high with pride and pleasure; and yet, in how many
households has not the sad knowledge come that the boys so loved, so
gloried in, are ignorant and selfish--ignorant of most of the branches
of useful knowledge, having tacitly been permitted to adopt habits of
grievous self-indulgence?

When the young fellow has to enter upon his profession, when he has
really to fight the battle of life, how often is it not found that
the expensive education bestowed upon him (often at the cost of much
self-denial from the rest of the family) is worth absolutely nothing?

Now that the fruit of so much learning has to be gathered, it is
discovered that there is actually no fruit to gather; that, in order
to be eligible even for the contest of these competitive examinations,
a young man who has been at school for years has to learn the very
rudiments of necessary knowledge, and must _cram_ himself in a few
months, and at a dire expenditure of money and health, in those very
subjects that he has so long been _nominally_ studying.

In how few schools are writing, English composition, arithmetic,
geography, or modern languages thoroughly taught? And yet these are the
very subjects absolutely essential for a candidate in a competitive
examination.

Then again, with regard to those who study hard. How many and how sad
are the cases where the student has broken down physically, because due
care had not been taken of the bodily health, while the brain had been
unduly taxed?

There are, doubtless, exceptional instances of genius so marvellous
that work comes easily both to mind and body. These are the men who
become eventually our great statesmen, our great lawyers; but these
mighty ones are the exception, not the rule. Few, indeed, are they
whose talents and whose powers enable them to overcome every difficulty.

For the most part the learned student sinks into a frail and
over-sensitive man, whose weak physical strength breaks down under a
too severe mental strain. Often, indeed, it does so on the very eve of
victory.

One of the most touching, and yet one of the truest and most vivid
pictures ever given to us by that great writer Bulwer, is the sorrowful
story in "Pelham" of the gentle and learned scholar, a student so
skilled in book learning that he had distanced all his compeers of
the day, and yet so feeble in health, so deficient in what is called
common-sense, that he was incapable of ruling his own household, or of
coping with the every-day affairs of life.

Surely there must be some means by which those appointed to rule can
exercise a discreet supervision over the boys and young men entrusted
to their care. A supervision which, while not entrenching on their
liberty, will yet lead into right ways those who are entering on the
varied and dangerous paths of life.

Some wise writer has said: "More education is effected during the
_amusements_ of youth than is gained by all the _studies_ to which
teachers give such zealous care."

Now, in most places where boys are being trained, it seems a point
of honour that out of school the masters shall never interfere, nor,
indeed, in most cases do they appear.


Besides the practices of olden times already mentioned the ancient
custom called "Moots" must not be forgotten.

Gray's Inn was especially conspicuous for those exercises, which Stow
calls "Boltes," "Mootes," or "putting of cases," for the "Boltes" were
conversational arguments addressed to or put to a student by a Bencher
and two barristers in private.

Subsequently, when the student had become a sufficiently expert
"Bolter," he was admitted to the "Mootes," where questions upon legal
matters were debated by the students in the presence of the Benchers of
the Society.

The object of these exercises was to promote the faculty of ready
speaking, and, in order to secure this end, the disputants were kept in
ignorance of the topic to be argued until called upon to discuss it.

The case, drawn up by the Reader, was laid upon the salt-cellar before
meals; none were permitted to look into it under pain of expulsion from
the Society.

These discussions were strictly legal, and the proceedings were
conducted as nearly as possible in like manner to those of the Courts
themselves. "About the end of the 17th century," says Lord Campbell,
"Mootes fell into disuse, and they have now entirely ceased."

It is in such institutions as these Inns of Court and other similar
communities, that the old feudal feeling respecting ancient servitors
has been retained in much of its pristine integrity. Many of the old
servants and inferior officers of Grays Inn may be said to belong to
the place by right of descent. They were born within its precincts,
they have been trained beneath the shadows of its old walls. In their
youth they began their course of serving under the guidance of father,
or grandfather, and now, in their old age, have in their turns some
post of trust and responsibility confided to them.

There is something especially delightful and heart-stirring in the
service of gray-headed men who have passed their lives in the same
place, serving the same masters.

Shakespeare felt this, when, in describing old Adam in _As You Like
It_, he makes the old man say:


     Master, go on, and I will follow thee,
     To the last gasp, with love and loyalty.


Most of the old servitors in Gray's Inn are well-educated,
well-informed men, and are in general fully acquainted with the
histories, traditions, and quaint biographies connected with the
ancient Courts wherein their lives have been passed.

The chief objects of their pride and affection, are of course the
Benchers. For the Benchers they entertain the profound reverence that
so powerful a body of learned men is entitled to expect, and this
respect is mingled at the same time with the affectionate solicitude
that old servants have for kind and esteemed masters.

They feel a great interest in the students, although they regard them
for the most part as wild young fellows, promising, no doubt, but still
far from possessing the talents of former generations of lawyers. They
will sometimes, indeed, shake their heads dolefully over the degeneracy
of young men of to-day, when compared with the youth of the celebrated
personages, whose names adorn the walls of the great hall.

Respecting the old buildings and old customs of the Inn they love to
dilate for the hour together, and even the rooks come in for a share
of their affection, and also for a considerable amount of anxiety, for
this venerable community shows alarming symptoms of decay, the aërial
colony having sadly diminished of late years.

In vain has the welfare of the infant progeny been tenderly watched
over, latterly many unnatural parent rooks appear to have taken a
dislike to their own offspring, and in that case peck the little ones
to death without thought of parental duty.

One old gray-headed rook, who is always the first to arrive on the
ground when feeding time has come, and who hops about with an
uncommonly consequential air, from all accounts appears to be a perfect
reprobate among his fellows. The number of wives he has cruelly
injured, and the number of children he has kicked out of the nest have
acquired for him the evil reputation of being the ringleader of the
badly disposed of the feathered tribe.

Unfortunately, also, there is reason to fear that so bad an example
has perverted several of the younger husbands and fathers. Infanticide
has indeed of late so much increased, that it has now become a matter
of grave consideration whether it will not be advisable to inflict the
extreme punishment of the law upon the chief criminal. It is feared
that it will be necessary to put this venerable gray head to death,
as a terrible example to all rooks, and as a warning to all intending
sinners.

Unhappily it must be admitted that the diminution of these interesting
inhabitants of the higher regions is not altogether owing to their
domestic delinquencies. It is, no doubt, partly caused by the rapid
growth of London, and the great distance the rooks have now to traverse
in order to arrive at their natural feeding grounds.

Another and deplorable cause arises from the decay and unavoidable
destruction of some of the oldest trees.

In former years there was a very large rookery in the gardens of Gray's
Inn. In 1875, however, storms and severe winters had so broken and
damaged many of the largest trees that it was necessary to cut them
down. This was done in March, and in April, to the consternation of the
inhabitants of the Inn, the rooks departed in a body, as if indignant
at being thus despoiled of a portion of their dominions.

For nearly a month not a bird appeared; then about six pair shyly
returned, as if unwilling to quit for ever so fair and so peaceful a
dwelling.

The other wanderers have never come back; but the little colony, though
so much diminished from what it was in days of yore, still flourishes
and indeed prospers.

There are more nests this spring than there have been for several past
years, and it may therefore be hoped that this ancient rookery may long
continue to be one of the charms and attractions of Gray's Inn.

Its existence undoubtedly mainly depends upon the durability of the
grand and beautiful dwelling-places of the birds, the noble old elms,
and unhappily such old elm trees are dangerous neighbours. With age
their wood becomes not only brittle, but peculiarly liable to internal
decay.

After the heavy rains that so often succeed dry summers, huge branches,
sometimes the tree itself, will fall without warning. Such accidents
not unfrequently occur in calm and quiet weather when danger is not
suspected; the vicinity of elm trees is therefore perilous to life as
well as to neighbouring buildings.

Besides rooks, many other birds, rare to London, may not unfrequently
be found in the pleasant gardens of Gray's Inn.

Dun, or hooded crows, have occasionally been seen here, and even
jackdaws sometimes come for a meal.

As for the starling, this clever bird knows where he is well off, he is
therefore a very constant visitor. Many delicate little songsters too,
who, having escaped from their cages, find that the liberty they have
gained has only made them persecuted waifs and strays in the wilderness
of London, seem to know, by intuition, that here they are not only in
safety, but secure of a kind welcome.

Goldfinches, chaffinches, green and gray linnets, the lesser redpole,
robins, willow-wren, even the song-thrush may from time to time be
found here, and, perched on the lower branches of the trees, reward the
kind hands that have given them food by pouring forth some of their
sweetest and most touching songs.

During the last three winters the tiny tomtit, with his pretty blue
head and delicate yellow breast, has made his appearance, and amongst
the rarer visitors are fieldfares, redwings, and the great titmouse.

As for the pert little friendly sparrows, they are evidently aware that
this is the land of plenty, so they hop about the old Courts with an
assuming air of assured proprietorship; and from house-top, doorsill,
and projecting eave, chirp condescending acknowledgments of the good
things they enjoy.

But why linger in the old Courts when the soft west wind is murmuring
so invitingly amongst the branches of the tall trees? Even the birds
cannot remain quiet this bright summer's evening. See how they are
flitting in and out the masses of dark green leaves, perching first
here, then there, and peeping into every crack and crevice of the old
bark. Now, many dart upwards to the topmost branches, whence they pour
forth their summer gladness in a burst of joyous song.

Let us go to the pleasant gardens--gardens so pleasant, not only in
themselves, but also charming with all the associations of past ages;
so connected with the pleasant hours passed here by men both learned
and celebrated in our history.

Every ancient tree has its story; every sunny grass-plot could relate a
little romance.

How many a love tale has doubtless been told and listened to in these
quiet alcoves? How many a courtly dame has gloried in the compliments
paid to her beauty when walking on these smooth lawns?

There is every reason to believe that these gardens were designed and
laid out in 1597 by Lord Bacon, who was then treasurer of Gray's Inn.

Do we not all know how dearly this great and clever man loved gardens?
He says: "God Almighty first planted a garden; and, indeed, it is
the purest of human pleasures; it is the greatest refreshment to the
spirits of man."

In the accounts of the Inn about that date appear the following items:

"4th July, 1597. Ordered that the summee of £7 15s. 4d. due to Mr.
Bacon, for planting of elm trees in the walkes be paid next term;" and
again, in the following year, there was an order made for the supply
of more young elms, etc., the cost of which, as appears by Mr. Bacon's
accounts, was £60 6s. 8d., a very large sum in those days.

We learn also from Howell's "Familiar Letters" and from Pepys' "Diary,"
that Gray's Inn Walks were at one time a fashionable promenade. Howell,
writing from Venice in 1621, to a friend residing in Gray's Inn, says:
"I hold your walks to be the pleasantest place about London, and that
you have there the choicest society." Pepys seems to have frequently
visited Gray's Inn Gardens as appears by his "Diary": "4th May, 1662.
When church was done my wife and I walked to Gray's Inn to observe
fashions of the ladies, because of my wife's making some clothes."

Cannot we picture to ourselves quiet Mrs. Pepys carefully scanning the
gay apparel of the fine ladies as they passed to and fro? daintily
walking with the little mincing French step that the fair Lady
Castlemaine had brought into fashion? The good little wife absorbed
in the many intricacies of plaits and puckers, weighing the several
advantages to be obtained by the use of plain or damask stuffs, all
unconscious, probably, that her volatile husband was as curiously
scanning the black eyes and pretty faces that had such overpowering
attractions for his wandering fancy.

Pepys again says:

"17th August, 1662. I was very well pleased with the sight of a fine
lady that I have often seen walk in Gray's Inn Gardens."

Dryden, in his "Sir Martin Marall," 1661, makes the following reference
to Gray's Inn Walks:

"_Sir John Shallow._ But where did you appoint to meet him?

"_Mrs. Millicent._ In Gray's Inn Walks."

Addison, in the _Spectator_, selects the terrace in Gray's Inn Gardens
as the place where Sir Roger de Coverley enjoys his morning walk. He
describes the dear old baronet as "hemming twice or thrice to himself
with great vigour, for he loves to clear his pipes in good air, to make
use of his own phrase, and is not a little pleased with any one who
takes notice of the strength which he still exerts in his morning hems."

Charles Lamb, in his delightful "Essays of Elia," gives an interesting
description of these gardens, adding, however, an indignant protest
against the injury their beauty had received from the ugly pile of
houses called Verulam Buildings, that had been recently erected. He
says:

"I am ill at dates, but I think it is now better than five-and-twenty
years ago that, walking in the gardens at Gray's Inn--they were then
finer than they are now--the accursed Verulam Buildings had not
encroached upon all the east side of them, cutting out delicate green
crankles, and shouldering away one of two of the stately alcoves of
the terrace. The survivor stands, gaping and relationless, as if it
remembered its brother. They are still the best gardens of any of
the Inns of Court--my beloved Temple not forgotten--have the gravest
character, their aspect being altogether revered and law-breathing.
Bacon has left the impress of his foot upon their gravel walks."

If the gardens give the summer charm to these old precincts, the grand
old Hall is the glory, and may well be called the heart of Gray's Inn.

Seventy feet in length, thirty-five in width, and forty-seven in
height, it is in truth a stately chamber, yet so harmonious are its
proportions, so graceful are its details, that the spectator knows not
which to admire most, the simple grandeur of its size, the delicate
beauty of the old stained glass windows, or the rich deep colouring
that time has given to the oaken panelling as well as to the heavy
oaken furniture.

At the east end is a raised daïs, the place of honour, on which stands
the table reserved for the Benchers and their guests.

The students dine in the body of the Hall, and the great black oak
tables and settles that they use were placed here in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth. As they were then, so they are now, and so they may probably
remain for as many more hundred years.

In those good or bad old times, wood and labour were of comparatively
little value, so furniture was then massive, and often decorated with
a lavish richness of detail that a modern upholsterer would dread as
much as he would admire, so great would be the modern cost both of the
material and the work expended on it. How many remnants of the tables
and chairs of this veneering age will there be in another century?

Near the daïs is a great oriel window, that beautiful characteristic
of the Tudor period; the old coloured glass, rich with the armorial
bearings of the Society, and emblazoned also with names well known and
distinguished in our English history.

An elaborately carved oaken screen at the opposite end of the Hall
conceals the entrance vestibule, and supports a Minstrel Gallery,
another delightful adjunct to the large Halls of the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries.

The screen itself is of quaint but handsome design, and is especially
interesting, as its decorations denote the period when it was erected.
Short, thick Ionic columns, carved in arabesque with scroll ornaments,
are surmounted by a range of semicircular arches. Above these is a
balustrade of open carving enclosing the Minstrels' Gallery.

Fortunately restorations have not been needed, nor have alterations
been made since the screen was placed here. As years have rolled on,
therefore, the solid old oak has acquired that richness of tone and
beauty of colouring that time alone can give.

Above the gallery is a large traceried window, and, as on the north and
south walls are nine mullioned and transomed windows, the Great Hall is
bright, well-lighted, and cheerful.

The great space between windows and floor is oak-panelled, and enriched
by the coats of arms of members of the Society who have filled the
office of treasurer.

There is something pleasant, but nevertheless sad, in reading over the
names of many, honoured in their time, still honoured here in this
venerable Inn of Court, but yet how long ago forgotten by the world
without.

Forgotten long ago, although as English laws are founded on precedent,
and not upon written codes, celebrated English lawyers probably make
more mark upon English history than great men of other professions.

In every Government the Lord Chancellor is invariably a member of the
Cabinet, and most of our leading statesmen have begun their career by
studying, even if they have not practised, the profession of the Law.
Still how very many there are, who, famous in their time, have passed
away from all men's remembrance, and but for the names inscribed on
these parental old walls, have struggled, gained the prize, and yet
have again faded into the darkness from which they fought so hard to
emerge.

Truly the glory of this world is but a shadow, nought but a faint
glimmer of a brief and perishing light.

The fine open roof of the Hall, with its great hammer-beam timbers, is
also a grand relic of the past; but the ancient _reredos_, or brass
grate which once stood in the centre of the chamber, as well as its
_louvre_--or smoke chimney--has been removed, and replaced by a modern
stove. A great lapse from beauty, but, nevertheless, a change that
contributes much to warmth and comfort.

The exterior of the building has, unhappily, been modernised, and, in
accordance with the bad taste that prevailed during the greater part of
the last century, the venerable brickwork has been covered with stucco.

It seems extraordinary that this miserable pretence of stone should at
one time have been so universally adopted in England, because, while
subject to the same discolouration and decay that injure stone in
this damp climate, age does not bestow upon it either dignity or rich
colouring.

Happily, fine brickwork is now beginning to be appreciated. Not only
is it rich in point of colour, but, skilfully used, the most delicate
ornamentation can be obtained. Witness, for instance, the glorious old
church of San Ambrogio in Milan, and in many churches of towns in North
Italy, where bricks have been used without any admixture of stone or
marble.

It must not be supposed that the noble and dignified old Hall of Gray's
Inn has been used solely for the pleasures of the table.

Many a gay masque, many a joyous revel has been held within its ancient
walls.

Royalty itself has frequently honoured by its presence the balls,
banquets, marriage feasts, and other "merrie makings" given by the
Honourable Society of Gray's Inn.

Queen Elizabeth came here soon after her accession to the throne.

The fair maiden Queen, then in the early bloom of youth, deigned to
tread a measure on the floor of the Hall, and her beauty and grace so
turned the heads of some of the more impressionable students, that two
of them became raving mad from love for their Royal and unapproachable
mistress.

Knowing how hopeless their passion was, these luckless young fellows
resolved to put themselves to death. They could not endure their cruel
torment; like the Persians, they declared their hearts were burnt up
with fire, and that life had become but a burden to them.

The legend, however, only relates their sufferings, their struggles,
and their desperate purpose. It is silent as to whether these fatal
intentions were ever carried into execution. It may be hoped,
therefore, that these love-sick youths recovered in time from their
love fit. The study of the law does not tend to foster romance, and
hard work in most cases is an effectual panacea against the blighting
effects of hopeless passion.

Standing in the old Hall, we can see, in fancy, the grand and
picturesque entertainment. We can see the young and graceful,
though somewhat stern-faced girl, queening it so royally amongst her
enthusiastic admirers. How happy she is now in her consciousness of
youth, and consequent beauty, in her royal dignity, a Queen at last in
her glorious kingdom. Above all, especially happy in being at length
free, no longer in daily terror of a prison or a scaffold. No longer
dreading to have to seal by her blood her resolve to keep intact her
royal position as heir to the throne, safe at last from the terror of
being called on to lay down her life ere she would abjure her religion
for that of her bigot sister Mary.

No wonder the young Sovereign was then bright and happy.

It is sad to think of the changes that years brought about. It is sad
to think of the suspicious, cold-hearted, merciless old woman, signing
not only the death warrant of the beautiful cousin of whom she was so
jealous, but also the death warrants of the men whom she had professed
to love.

Truly it may be said that envy, malice, and uncharitableness are
the vices to which the great and prosperous are peculiarly exposed.
Greatness and prosperity eventually produce the very whips that scourge
those who have not been constantly chastened by care and sorrow; for
the Almighty bestows His good gifts far more equally than we mortals
can in general either perceive or understand.

There is a peace of heart in lowly stations that the great can but
seldom enjoy. The biography of celebrated monarchs and statesmen
sufficiently shows that no rank, however exalted, is exempt from
mortifications and annoyances, trying alike to temper and to pride,
and it is very evident from such histories that the noblest of all
governments, the government of oneself, is far more difficult of
attainment for the exalted than for the humbler inhabitants of earth.

Not only during Queen Elizabeth's reign, but at a much earlier period,
the Inns of Court had been celebrated for the magnificence of their
masques and revels.

The first entertainment of this kind, of which there is any certain
record, took place at Gray's Inn in the year 1525.

Hall in his chronicle thus speaks of it:

"A Plaie at Gray's Inn. This Christmas was a goodly disguising played
at Gray's Inn, which was compiled by John Roo, Serjeant at the Law,
twenty years past. This plae was so set forth with rich and costly
apparel, and with strange devices of masks and morrisches, that it
was highly praised by all men, except by the Cardinal (Wolsey), who
imagined the play was devised of him. In a great fury he sent for
Master Roo, and took from him his Coif, and sent him to the Fleet, and
afterwards he sent for the young gentlemen that played in the play, and
highly rebuked and threatened them, and sent one of them, called Master
Moyle of Kent, to the Fleet, but by means of friends Master Roo and he
were delivered at last.

"This play sore displeased the Cardinal, and yet it was never meant for
him; wherefore many wise men grudged to see him take it so to heart;
and even the Cardinal said the King (Henry VIII.) was highly displeased
at it, and spake nothing of himself."

This unfortunate play seems to have made a great stir at the time, for
not only Hall, but Fox, in his "Acts and Monuments," thus alludes to
the performance when writing of a certain Simon Fish, who also belonged
to Gray's Inn. Fox says:

"It happened the first year this gentleman came to London to dwell,
which was about the year of our Lord, 1525, that there was a certain
play, or interlude, made by one M. Roo, of the same Inn, gentleman,
in which play partly was matter against the Cardinal Wolsey; and when
none durst take upon them to play that part which touched the said
Cardinal, this aforesaid Mr. Fish took upon him to do it. Whereupon
great displeasure ensued against him on the Cardinal's part, insomuch
as he, being pursued by the said Cardinal the same night that this
tragedy was played, was compelled of force to avoid his own house, and
so fled over the sea to Tindal."

It is singular that neither Hall nor Fox makes any mention of the name
of the play that had such unhappy results for the luckless gentlemen
who took part in it.

The powerful Cardinal was a dread enemy. He brooked neither insult nor
slight, and, when angered, was apt to carry out his vengeance with a
completeness that, at the least, brought ruin on his victims. Happy
indeed were they did they escape with their lives.

The two offenders on this occasion paid a heavy price for their night's
amusement. Their professional prospects were destroyed for ever, their
names were erased from the list of Gray's Inn, and never again appeared
on it. To Roo, a Serjeant in the Law of twenty years' standing, such a
penalty must have been a cruel blow.


Hard work seems to have been seasoned with much amusement in the merry
days of Queen Bess, for at no period do we read of so many masques,
revels, and such like entertainments as during the reign of our maiden
Queen.

Men of all ages and ranks, even those devoted to the learned and
severe study of the law, indulged themselves to the full in these
amusements. Judges and statesmen condescended to arrange and fashion
the festivities, and occasionally indeed took part in them, nothing
daunted by the fact that they not unfrequently ended in brawls and
fighting. Men fought fiercely too in these turbulent times, and the
arms then in common use were formidable weapons. It was the custom to
carry bucklers with a point or poke, as it was called, in the centre,
from ten to twelve inches in length. Every haberdasher sold these
bucklers, and their use became so much abused, that, in the eighth year
of Elizabeth, a proclamation was issued prohibiting the sale of any of
which the poke exceeded two inches in length. At the same time, the
length of swords was limited to one yard and half a quarter, nor was
any dagger to have a blade above twelve inches long.

In the records we have respecting many of these gay doings and
magnificent festivals, Gray's Inn and the Temple appear to have taken
the lead, and at last a sort of union was entered into between the two
Inns. Over the great gates of the gardens of the Inner Temple appears
the "Griffin" of Gray's Inn, whilst over the principal entrance in
Gray's Inn Square, is carved in bold relief the "Winged Horse" of the
Inner Temple.

A curious pamphlet, published in 1594, commemorates this union. It
is entitled, "Gesta Grayorium, or the History of the High and Mighty
Prince, Henry Prince of Purpoole, etc."

It gives a very detailed account of a grand masque that took place on
the 20th December, with a minute description of the rich and quaint
costumes worn by the actors who took part therein.

There is reason to think that Lord Bacon himself organised this revel,
and also assisted in its preparation.

On the said 20th December, it being St. Thomas's Eve, the Prince of
Purpoole, as he is termed (Purpoole being the name of the property on
which Gray's Inn was built), accompanied by a long train of courtiers
and followers, marched in procession from his lodgings in the Inn to
the Great Hall, where all things had with fitting dignity been prepared
for his reception.

Here he seated himself on a magnificent throne, having over his head
a canopy made of rich cloth of state. His great Lords and Councillors
grouped themselves around him. Below the daïs were seated his learned
council and his learned lawyers, while the numerous officers and
attendants of his Court were arranged becomingly in their proper places.

The narrator dilates with much enthusiasm on the magnificence and
beauty of the spectacle, and we can well believe the effect must have
been fine. Still, in these prosaic days, we find it difficult to
understand the Lord High Chancellor and the Queen's Judges of the High
Court of Justice giving much thought and time to an entertainment of
this description.

However, there is no doubt that in these same riotous, fighting,
turbulent, and yet romantic times such spectacles did excite prodigious
interest. Our chronicler continues to relate, that common report had so
cried up the merits of this especial performance, that the expectation
of strangers, both English and foreign, was greatly excited, insomuch
that it became necessary to repeat it, and to have many grand nights
especially arranged for the entertainment of distinguished strangers.

Unhappily however, then, as is sometimes the case now, the crowd of
spectators greatly exceeded the space provided for their accommodation.
The multitude of beholders, indeed, was so considerable that there was
not convenient room for those who were actors. Many of the performers
among the Templarians (as they were then called) left the Hall so
displeased and angry that their discontent resulted in blows, and the
fighting became so furious that the next day it was found necessary to
have an inquiry into the cause of "these disorders."

Nothing daunted, however, by the ill-success of their opening night,
the revellers organised another grand performance on the 3rd January
following, in honour of a great number of ambassadors, knights,
ladies, and other worshipful personages, amongst whom were the Lord
Keeper, the Lords Shrewsbury, Burleigh, Cumberland, most of the
officers of State and of the Queen's household, and it is said all
these guests had convenient places and very good entertainment.

The Temple and Gray's Inn were now reconciled and had become friendly
again, so the day after this entertainment the Prince of Purpoole,
accompanied by the "Ambassadors of Templaria," and attended by eighty
gentlemen of Gray's Inn and the Temple (each of them wearing a plume on
his head), dined in state with the Lord Mayor at Crosby Place.

The next grand night was upon Twelfth Night, on which occasion there
was again a great company of lords, ladies, and knights; and at
Shrovetide the Prince and his company visited Queen Elizabeth at
Greenwich.

After the performance Her Majesty "willed the Lord Chamberlain that the
gentlemen should be invited on the next day, and that he should present
them to her," which was done, and Her Majesty gave them her hand to
kiss, with most gracious words of commendation to them, "particularly
and in general of Gray's Inn, as an house that she was much beholden
unto, for that it did always study for some sports to present unto her."

The same night there was fighting at "Barriers," at which the Prince
behaved so valiantly and skilfully that the prize, a jewel set with
seventeen diamonds and four rubies, was presented to him by the Queen.

The following order of Pension, to defray the expenses of the above
entertainment, was made on February 9th, 37th Elizabeth.

"At this Pension it is ordered that every Reader of this House, towards
the charges of the shows and sports before Her Majesty at Shrovetide
last year, shall pay ten shillings, and every Ancient six shillings and
eightpence, and every Utter Barrister five shillings, and every other
Gentleman of this Society, three shillings and sixpence before the end
of this term."

There is a tradition in Gray's Inn that the screen already mentioned
under the gallery in the Great Hall, as well as the dining tables now
used in the Hall, were given to the Society by that Queen as tokens of
Her Majesty's regard.

Queen Elizabeth's memory is still held in much affection by the ever
loyal subjects in Gray's Inn, and on the Grand Day of each term "the
glorious, pious, and immortal memory of good Queen Bess" is still
solemnly given in Hall.

In 1613, "the Maske of Flowers was presented by the Gentlemen of
Graie's Inn, in the Banqueting House, at the Court of Whitehall, on
the occasion of the marriage of the Earle of Somerset with the Lady
Frances, daughter of the Earl of Suffolk."

In "The Court and Times of King James I.," there is a letter from I.
Chamberlaine, dated 23rd December, 1613, in which he says:

"Sir Francis Bacon prepares a masque to honour their marriage which
will stand him in above £2,000, and, although he has been offered some
help by the House, and especially by Mr. Solicitor Sir Henry Yelverton,
who would have sent him £500, yet he would not accept it."

The story of this masque was published the following year, with a
dedication "to the verie honourable Sir Francis Bacon, His Majesty's
Attorney-General."

The dedication states:

"That you have graced in general the Societies of the Innes of Court in
continuing them still as third persons with the nobility and Court, in
doing the King honour, and particularly Graie's Inne, which, as you
have formerly brought to flourish both in the ancienter and younger
sort by countenancing virtue in every quality, so now you have made a
notable demonstration thereof in the lighter and less serious kind."

The members of this learned Society did not always, it appears, amuse
themselves in so discreet a manner, for there is a letter in the same
book, "The Court and Times of James I.," relating that:

"The gentlemen of Gray's Inn, to make an end of Christmas, on Twelfth
Night, at the dead time of the night, shot off all the chambers (small
cannon), which they had borrowed from the Tower, being as many as
filled four carts.

"The King, awakened by this noise, started out of his bed, and cried:
'Treason! treason!' So the City was in an uproar, in such sort, as it
is said, that the whole Court was raised, and almost in arms, the Earl
of Arundel running to the bed-chamber, with his sword drawn, as to
rescue the King's person."

The following sketch of a ticket of admission to the masque at Gray's
Inn on the 2nd February, 1682, is taken from Nichol's "Progresses of
Elizabeth:"

[Illustration: Ticket]

This entertainment is thus alluded to by Luttrell in his diary:

"On Saturday the 4th inst., the revells began at Graie's Inn. On 23rd
January, Sir Richard Gipps, master of the revells at Graie's Inn,
attended by his revellers and comptrollers, went to Whitehall in one
of His Majesty's coaches, with several noble men's coaches, and six
horses, to invite the King and Queen, the Duke (York) and Duchesse,
and the rest of the Court, to a mask at Graie's Inn, on Candlemas Day;
and accordingly there was great preparation that day, diverse of the
nobility and gentry in masks attended, who danced in the Hall, and
afterwards were entertained with a splendid banquet."

Evelyn had already spoken of these revels in terms of contempt and
disapprobation, terming them "solemn fooleries," and regretting that
the King countenanced them and the deep play that usually concluded the
evening. He says:

"6th January, 1661-2.--This evening, according to custome, His Majesty
opened the revells (at Lincoln's Inn) of that night, by throwing the
dice himself in the privy chamber, where was a table set on purpose,
and lost his £100 (the year before he won £1,500). The ladies also
plaid very deepe.... Sorry I am that such a wretched custome as play
to that excess should be countenanced in a Court that ought to be an
example of virtue to the rest of the Kingdom."

During the troubled reign of James II., and during the first year
of that of William III., men's minds were too harassed by political
anxieties to allow them much time, or indeed inclination, to indulge
in such costly and somewhat tedious entertainments. Money was scarce
in England, and the few who had any, cautiously concealed even the
semblance of riches, not knowing what changes a few years might produce.

Who, indeed, could predict with reasonable probability what King would
rule over the land, or, indeed, which Church would gain the supremacy?

From this period these masques fell into disrepute, and the last record
of so many gay revels is in 1773, on the occasion of Mr. Talbot being
elevated to the woolsack.

After a long and elaborate dinner, every member of each mess had a
flask of claret, besides the usual allowance of port and sack.

The Benchers then all assembled in the Great Hall, and a large ring was
formed round the fireplace, when the Master of the Revels taking the
Lord Chancellor by the right hand, he with his left took Mr. Justice
Page, who, joined to the other Serjeants and Benchers, danced about the
coal fire according to the old ceremony three times, while the ancient
song, accompanied with music, was sung by one Tony Aston, dressed as a
barrister.

It is difficult to understand so dignified a personage as the Lord High
Chancellor inaugurating his accession to office by such an after-dinner
dance.

Perhaps the extra flask of claret, following the usual port wine and
sack, may have had something to do with so singular a proceeding.

At any rate, after this remarkable festival, all such hilarious
proceedings ceased, and henceforward the great dinners were given with
all befitting and solemn dignity.

If the grand old Hall may be deemed the heart of Gray's Inn, then the
jewelled crown that is the noblest ornament of this time-honoured abode
of learning may be said to have been created by the distinguished men
who have grown up under her fostering care, whose studies have been
matured within the shelter of her old walls.

Names are inscribed here--on the panels, on the windows, in the
hall--the very sight of which must fire the heart of many a student
with pride and hope.

However poor he may be, however lowly his birth, however destitute
he may be of everything, save of the divine spark of genius and of
that safest attendant upon genius--resolute perseverance--the path of
success is open to him.

The Temple of Fame is before him. He may seize the prize it contains,
if he will; but the road is steep and hard to climb, and the thorns
that beset it are many and sharp.

What stories might be told of the early struggles, of the early
hardships of many of those who have ultimately attained the highest
places in the State and in the Law!

How many of those whose names will never die while England has a
history, might relate how keen, nay, how terrible had been their
sufferings when they first started in their career.

With what difficulty they obtained even necessary clothing. How hard
it was to earn the daily bread. How many sacrifices had to be made,
how many privations endured, ere the books could be bought that were
absolutely essential for their legal studies.

And if it is thus hard for those who win, what tales of bitter woe
and anguish might be written of those who labour and fail. Of those
who, having both talent and application, yet lack, alas! the peculiar
genius that enables the great lawyer to grasp a subject or legal point
with a rapidity, and a perspicuity that is truly marvellous to the
unlearned!

What hours of anxious study, what fevered days and terrible nights must
the unsuccessful, struggling man endure. Conscious, in all probability,
of his own deficiencies, and yet hoping on--ever hoping on, not daring
to confess even to himself that the studies of years have been of no
avail, that the tree is barren, and will never bear fruit.

These are the unhappy men who eventually sink into the crowd of poor
legal hacks. These are indeed the jackals who must cater and work for
the lions of their order.


NOTE.--Those who are interested in the history and customs of this old
Inn of Court are referred to an admirable work on the subject, namely,
"Notes on Gray's Inn," by W. R. Douthwaite, Esq., librarian.




THE TWO BROTHERS, ANTHONY AND FRANCIS BACON.


The most notable of the many distinguished names recorded in Gray's Inn
is that of Francis Bacon, afterwards Lord Verulam, Viscount St. Albans,
and Lord High Chancellor of England.

The son of a distinguished and learned gentleman, he was also happy
in having in his mother a woman alike remarkable for her piety, her
domestic virtues, and her great learning. Accomplished in no common
degree in the charming arts of music and painting, few scholars of the
day excelled Lady Bacon in intimate knowledge of Latin and Greek.

Francis, her second son, was born in 1561, and so early gave tokens of
such exceptional talent that when very young he was honoured by the
notice of Queen Elizabeth. Whatever the faults, errors, and meannesses
of Queen Elizabeth as a woman, in her character of sovereign, in one
respect at least, she showed herself to be well worthy to wear a crown,
well worthy to govern a great people, inasmuch as she possessed to a
rare extent that inestimable quality in those who have to rule, the
power of appreciating genius.

Under no reign has learning been more fostered, under no reign have
talented men so clustered round the throne, as during the reign of this
maiden Queen.

Elizabeth appreciated the powers of, and knew when she had a
distinguished statesman, and though she might ill-treat him, show
herself most niggardly towards him, not unfrequently betraying cruel
ingratitude, yet she ever respected his talents and caused them to be
respected by others.

Both Francis Bacon and his elder brother Anthony were educated at
Trinity College, Cambridge.

Anthony was a man of good and even brilliant parts, but being the
eldest son of Sir Nicholas Bacon, who, besides a great legal position,
had large landed estates in several of the midland counties, young
Anthony was not destined to any profession. He spent much of his time
in travelling, and thus became personally acquainted with most of the
learned persons of the age.

In 1579, being then twenty-one, to the annoyance of his family he
resolved to reside entirely in Paris, and there he remained for some
years. He then went to Bourges and Geneva, and, at the latter place,
lodged in the house of the celebrated Theodore Beza.

From Geneva he successively removed to Montpellier, Marseilles,
Bordeaux, and Montauban, having become by this time a sort of
recognised Government correspondent, constantly communicating to the
English ministry intelligence of any importance.

In 1585 he went to Bearn on a visit to Henry of Navarre, afterwards the
great Henry IV. of France, and here made acquaintance with the learned
Lambert Dansens, who, as a mark of esteem, dedicated several of his
works to his English friend.

Here, too, began for poor Sir Anthony the great romance of his life.
It was at this Court that he became acquainted with a beautiful French
lady, whose many charms and winning graces broke the poor baronet's
heart. With some rare and gifted natures love is an integral part of
life. When it is clear that love must die, life in a great measure dies
too, and so it was with Sir Anthony Bacon.

His love was unsuccessful; so, sore-hearted and with broken health he
left the scene of his brief happiness and of his enduring grief, and
returned to England, never again to leave it. He took up his residence
at Essex House, and after a time rallied sufficiently from his
disappointment to resume his correspondence with some of his foreign
friends. Amongst these his most constant and valued correspondent was
King Henry IV. of France; but the sorrowful love romance had destroyed
the most brilliant portion of his existence, and Sir Anthony never
quite recovered from the pain he had then suffered.

His more celebrated brother was framed in harder mould. Before Francis
was seventeen he had not only traversed the whole circle of the liberal
arts as then taught, but he had begun to perceive how fallacious
was the recognised philosophy of the day. And these fallacies he
subsequently effectually exposed.

When the time came for leaving Cambridge, his father sent him first to
France, and afterwards allowed him to make, what was called, the grand
tour.

So well did he profit by his travels, that he wrote a general view of
the state of Europe before he was nineteen.

He had intended carrying his researches still farther abroad,
projecting a journey to Egypt and India, but the death of his father
obliging him to return to England, he applied himself to the study of
Common Law at Gray's Inn.

Even in these early days, the lucidity of his reasoning, the keenness
of his intellect attracted the notice of many leading men.

The Earl of Essex in particular, who was a great discerner of merit,
became his intimate friend, and endeavoured, though unsuccessfully, to
procure for Bacon the office of Queen's Solicitor.

Failing in this, Lord Essex, to console his _protégé_ under such a
disappointment, generously conferred on him a present of land to the
value of £1,800.

Notwithstanding, however, the friendship of so powerful a patron,
and notwithstanding the favour with which the Queen already regarded
him, young Francis had, during the earlier years of his career, many
obstacles to contend against.

Talents so remarkable, such great patronage, and especially the favour
of the monarch, created a host of enemies, all of whom decried the
young aspirant with the spiteful bitterness and venom of envy. They
represented him as an essentially unpractical enthusiast, whose head
was filled with philosophical and speculative ideas. As one far more
likely therefore to perplex, than to forward public business.

So many cabals resulted in his being unable to obtain for a
considerable period either office or preferment, and he was over forty
years of age before Lord Burleigh, who was then Lord Treasurer,
bestowed upon him the place of Registrar to the Star Chamber.

This appointment was worth about £1,600, but its duties were both
onerous and unpleasant. It so happened that to Bacon they became
especially distasteful, for the critical moment arrived when he had
to decide whether he would resign his preferment, or disregard every
sacred claim of honour and friendship.

Unhappily the choice he made at this juncture has tarnished for ever a
name, that in other respects he rendered so illustrious, and ultimately
it, in fact, proved the ruin of this great and gifted man.

Even in the events of this world, how often do our own faults become
the very lashes that scourge us. How frequently does the evil we have
done to others return upon us fourfold.

"Cast thy bread upon the waters," says the preacher, "and after many
days it shall come back to thee," and this applies to evil as well as
to good deeds.

During the larger part of Queen Elizabeth's reign, both in Court and
State, two great parties were for ever struggling to obtain supremacy.

The two Cecils were at the head of one of these parties.

The leader of the other was first the Earl of Leicester, and
subsequently, his son-in-law, the Earl of Essex.

Bacon's undoubted genius excited both the jealousy and the dislike of
his relatives, the Cecils, and the intimate friendship he had formed
with Lord Essex also much increased their covert animosity, although
they did not care to exhibit it openly against so near a connection.

Still, though outwardly courteous, Bacon was well aware that in them he
had formidable enemies, and he knew that his future prosperity mainly
depended upon his being able to convert these enemies into friends.

Essex, with the generosity that was his distinguishing characteristic,
had not only exerted himself strenuously on his friend's behalf, but
had also, as already mentioned, by a noble gift, sought to console him
for his disappointment in failing to obtain place.

But after years of prosperity and power, the fatal day came when the
favourite was to share the fate of most Royal favourites, Essex was
disgraced and fell into deep misfortune.

That a man could write as Bacon afterwards wrote of "Friendship,"
and of "Honour and Reputation," and yet permit himself, at the base
dictates of ambition, to desert, nay, even to betray his earliest and
most generous friend, must seem to every noble heart a fact almost
incredible; but it is unhappily an undoubted fact, that when Essex
was at the bar of the House of Lords to be tried for his life. Bacon,
in his professional capacity, appeared _against_ his generous and
affectionate friend and patron.

Nor was even this the extent of his unworthy treason.

For some time previously, and also after the unhappy favourite had
expiated his follies by a shameful death, discontent and irritation had
been spreading amongst all classes, and the Government grew daily more
and more unpopular.

At length the clamours of the people became so loud and deep, not only
against ministers, but also against the Queen herself, that it was
deemed necessary to make a formal vindication of the proceedings of the
Administration.

For this end all the blame, all the obloquy of every administrative
failure must be thrown upon the dead man.

Bacon accepted the discreditable, nay, disgraceful duty that had
been assigned to him. He allowed himself to vilify the name of
his benefactor, his early friend. He agreed to cast the odium of
treason upon one from whom he had accepted gifts, and for whom he had
professed, and professed for years, the most ardent friendship.

In a skilful and masterly paper he justified the proceedings of the
Government, and drew up a declaration of the treason of which Essex had
been found guilty, and for which he had duly suffered.

Bacon retained his place. He had assured his career. He had forced the
world to recognise his transcendent abilities; but ambition must have
indeed hardened the heart of this man, ere she could console him for
having thus cast from him every sentiment of gratitude, and affection,
for having thus forsworn the honourable fealty that he owed to his
benefactor and his friend.

From this moment, however, Bacon rose steadily, and, after the
accession of James I., having published a brilliant pamphlet in favour
of uniting the two kingdoms of England and Scotland, he rapidly
obtained considerable honour.

In 1616 he was sworn of the Privy Council. He then devoted himself to
reducing, and, in fact, recomposing the laws of England.

When Attorney-General he distinguished himself by his endeavours to
restrain duelling, a practice at that time very frequent and very fatal.

In 1617 he was appointed Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, and the
following year he was raised to the woolsack, and created Lord Verulam.

In the midst of these honours, and notwithstanding, also, the press of
business, he did not forget his studies in philosophy, but in 1620 he
published his great work, "Novum Organum." In 1621 he was advanced to
the dignity of Viscount, and as Lord St. Albans he appeared with great
splendour at the opening of Parliament.

But he had now arrived at the culminating point of his triumphs, and
at the very moment when his power seemed greatest and his position most
stable, his fall was near.

A very few months after Parliament had assembled, a committee of the
House of Commons was appointed to inquire into the abuses that existed
in the Courts of Justice; and, ere many sittings had taken place, the
Chancellor was openly accused of corrupt practices.

The King, ever pusillanimous, and shrinking from giving support to a
falling man, sent for Bacon, and, it is said, positively enjoined him
to submit to his peers, promising to reward him afterwards!

The Chancellor, although he could have had but little faith in such
promises, and foresaw his approaching ruin if he did not plead for
himself, resolved, however, to obey the Royal command.

He was silent therefore under the accusations brought against him, and
on the 3rd May, 1621, the House of Lords gave judgment against him,
pronouncing upon him the following severe sentence:

"That he was to pay a fine of £40,000, and be confined a prisoner in
the Tower, during the King's pleasure. That he should for ever be
incapable of holding any place, office, or employment in the State, and
that he should never again sit in Parliament, nor come within the verge
of the Court."

At this distance of time the world judges him more leniently than he
was then judged by his peers.

Greed of money had never been one of Bacon's failings. He loved power,
place, and the good things that money can procure. He also loved his
ease, and the affection and good-will of those about him; but of the
gold itself he took little or no heed.

It was, in fact, to this carelessness, and to an amiability that he
carried to the extent of selfish weakness that he owed his fall. For
years all that he possessed had been at the service of those about him,
and unhappily he was surrounded by, and had bestowed his kindness on
persons, who were not only unworthy of it, but who had basely abused
the confidence he had reposed in them.

We are told by Rushworth, that the Chancellor (Bacon) treasured up
nothing for himself or his family, but that he was so over-indulgent to
his servants, that this indulgence reached the point of conniving at
their evil doings. Both his servants and his dependents were therefore
profuse and extravagant, and had at their command whatever he was
master of.

Too late did Bacon perceive his error. It is related that, one day
during his trial, he passed through a room where several of his
servants were sitting. They rose up respectfully to salute him as he
went by, but said the Chancellor, "Sit down, my masters, for your rise
has been my fall."

There seems little reason now to doubt that the gifts the Chancellor
was accused of taking had been enforced, and received by these
underlings.

It was these lamentable gifts that had caused him to be suspected of
injustice, and yet it was subsequently proved that his decrees had been
made for the most part with so much equity, that not one of them was
ever reversed as unjust.

"It was peculiar to this man," says one of his numerous biographers,
"to have nothing narrow or selfish in his composition. He gave away
without concern whatever he possessed, and believing other men to be of
the same mould, he received with as little consideration."

This opinion is probably correct in the main, but the greatest admirers
of this talented and in many respects exceptionally great man, must
admit that, ere he could have become unmindful of the honourable fealty
he owed to his dead friend, the greed of power must have been strong
in his heart, and that it was a selfish reluctance to take trouble
that made him disregard one of the most stringent duties of the great,
not only to be just themselves, but to ascertain that injustice is not
practised by their subordinates.

After a short period of imprisonment the fallen Chancellor was released
from the Tower. The King ultimately remitted his fine; and, after the
death of James, he was again summoned to attend Parliament in the first
year of the reign of Charles I., but never again after his degradation
did Bacon take part in active life.

At first, indeed, after his release from prison, he found himself in
extreme poverty. All he valued in this world had gone from him. Place,
position, money, and, above all, that consideration from others which
had been so dear to his heart.

So great at one time was his pecuniary distress, that he wrote a
pathetic letter to King James, entreating His Majesty's assistance.
"Lest," as he expresses it, "he should be reduced to carry a wallet,
and after having lived only to study, be forced to study to live."

Notwithstanding the sorrowfulness of the letter, there lurks within
it a vein of the humour that rendered him so delightful a companion,
and through it all can be perceived the indomitable spirit of the man,
that, even in the bitterest moment of his shattered fortunes, rose
superior to the ruin that had overtaken him.

The energy that had made him so powerful in his public career did not
desert him in his retirement.

With all the ardour of his great heart, he loved his country home, his
quiet lodgings in Gray's Inn, and the studies to which, during the last
years of his life, he wholly devoted himself. It was at this period
that he wrote some of his most important English and Latin works;
and from these it is evident that his thoughts were as free, and as
vigorous, as they had ever been during the earliest and most brilliant
years of his career.

Although he had been unhappy in having had many false and unworthy
friends, one, at least, loved him faithfully to the end; and it was by
him, Sir Thomas Meanty, his secretary, that the monument was erected to
his memory in St. Michael's Church, St. Albans.

Many have written the biography of this distinguished man, but the best
evidences of his life are the works he has given to the world: works
replete with noble thoughts; works so grand, that they make us the more
regret that there should be even one flaw to tarnish the golden lustre
that shines around the name of one so brilliant, so illustrious.


It was in chambers in Coney Court, now called Gray's Inn Square,
that Bacon passed his last years, and where he wrote several of his
greatest works.

The aspect of these old houses--indeed, of these old chambers--bears
traces, not only of the storms and sunshine that have passed over them
in all this lapse of time, but they also speak to us powerfully of the
vicissitudes of human life, and of the changes that are taking place
around us yearly, nay, hourly.

What anxiety and distress, what joy and what pain, have not these old
walls witnessed.

How many hearts have beat high with hope, or have been racked with
anguish in the thoughtful gloom of many of these shadowy rooms.

Bacon himself, though he bore so brave a front before the world, must
have had many torturing recollections and regrets as he paced up and
down these ancient chambers. But then, again, what noble thoughts came
to cheer and support him as he overcame the keenness of his pain, and
fixed his mind on objects higher and grander than the passing events of
human life.

Thus generation after generation pass away, with all their joys and all
their fears.

Each human being departs, and his name is no more known even in the
spot where he dwelt; but still the great squadrons of mankind are ever
advancing, with the same delights, the same anxieties as those who have
left this earth many hundreds of years ago; thus every place is filled
and emptied, and filled again in endless rotation.

Truly life is but a magic-lantern, and the players therein are but
fleeting shadows.

Bacon died on Easter Sunday, the 9th of April, 1626, being then
sixty-six years of age.

In the December previous he had with his own hand written his will. In
it he writes:

"For my burial, I desire it may be in St. Michael's Church near St.
Albans. There was my mother buried, and it is the parish church of my
mansion house at Gorhambury, and it is the only Christian church within
the walls of Old Verulam. For my name and memory, I leave it to men's
charitable speeches, and to foreign nations, and to the next ages."




SIR NICHOLAS BACON.


Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal during the greater
part of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, was born at Chislehurst, in Kent,
in 1510.

Few men have enjoyed during a long and brilliant career a more
unblemished reputation for probity, or have conducted themselves in
troubled and dangerous times with more prudence and good discretion
than this celebrated statesman and judge.

He received his first rudiments of learning at home, and at a small
village school in the neighbourhood of his father's house; but when
still very young he was sent to Corpus Christi College, Cambridge.

Here he made great progress in all branches of useful knowledge, and
then travelled over France, making some stay in Paris, in order, as an
old chronicler remarks, "to give the last polish to his education."

Either this last polish or his natural gifts enabled him to turn his
speeches with singular aptitude and felicity. Though resolute in
proposing and carrying out any measure he deemed advisable, he spoke
with so much prudence and tact, that he ever succeeded in retaining the
good will even of his opponents.

This is all the more remarkable, for never, perhaps, did party feeling
run so high, never was party animosity more bitter, both with regard to
politics and also on religious subjects, than during this period, when
England was convulsed by the tremendous changes that were taking place
in the Church, and by the savage persecutions that had been endured
and inflicted both by Protestants and by Roman Catholics.

Alas! that men, while calling themselves Christians, should so distort
and make of none effect the first principles of our Divine Teacher!

When Bacon returned from Paris he settled in Gray's Inn, and applied
himself with such assiduity to the study of the law, that he speedily
became of note amongst the learned in that profession. His profound
knowledge of many difficult points of law enabled him to be useful not
only to the Government but also to the King (Henry VIII.), insomuch
that, on the dissolution of the Monastery of Bury St. Edmund's, in
Suffolk, King Henry conferred upon him several manors in that county.

Two years afterwards he was promoted to the office of Attorney of
Wards, an appointment of both honour and profit.

Edward VI. confirmed him in this post, and in the last year of that
King's reign Bacon was elected treasurer of Gray's Inn.

His great moderation and his consummate prudence preserved him safely
during the dangerous reign of Queen Mary, although he was well known to
be a staunch Protestant.

No sooner did Elizabeth come to the throne, however, than he was
knighted, and the Great Seals of England having been taken from
Nicholas Heath, Archbishop of York, they were delivered to Sir Nicholas
Bacon in November, 1558, with the title of Lord Keeper.

It is much to the credit of Sir Nicholas that he himself introduced
a Bill into Parliament for the purpose of defining and settling the
position of Lord Keeper; although, had he chosen to be silent, and to
procure for himself the additional title of Lord Chancellor, he might
have obtained almost unlimited power.

But his motto was, and ever had been, "_Mediocra firma_." He was
content to be safe, and did not desire greatness.

Unlike many celebrated men, he was unaffectedly modest, and devoid of
self-seeking, so that while it was said of some other great personages
that they seemed wiser than they were, the common voice of the nation
agreed in this, that Sir Nicholas Bacon was even wiser than he seemed.

To the Queen he was indeed a most valuable minister, and a most trusty
counsellor, for not only was he as a statesman remarkable for a clear
head, and wise, farseeing sagacity, but he had marvellous skill in
balancing factions, and it was thought he taught the Queen this same
secret, the more important to Elizabeth, for being, as Her Majesty
was, the last of her family, she was without those supports that are
ordinarily incidental to Princes.

In Chancery, also, Bacon much distinguished himself by the very
moderate use he made of power, and by the great respect he ever showed
for the Common Law. But better than all, in an age of bigotry, when
religious differences aroused in men every violent and cruel passion,
Bacon showed that though his own religious opinions were strong, he
could speak and act on that, as on all other subjects, with moderation
and with strict equity.

The main business of the session of January, 1559, was the settlement
of religious observances, and no man had a greater share in this
momentous and difficult question than the Lord Keeper.

The speeches he made at this period are described by many contemporary
writers as "most eloquent, solid, and excellent speeches;" and at this
day we can perceive that they were, as another old chronicler observes,
"models of eloquence, profound wisdom, and conciliatory discretion."

Few men have left behind them so delightful a character as this famous
statesman and lawyer.

Powerful and wise in public life, in his home he was the tender father,
the affectionate relative, the indulgent and unostentatious friend.

Though endowed with a keen appreciation of art, and gifted with a fine
and graceful taste, as appeared by his house and gardens at Gorhambury,
yet he never permitted himself to indulge in an undue or lavish
expenditure. So simple and modest was he in this respect, that, when
the Queen came to visit him at Redgrave, Her Majesty said she found the
house too small for so great a man.

"Nay, madam," said the Chancellor, "but it is your Majesty who has made
me too great for my house."

Yet, with his usual graceful tact and ready acquiescence in the wishes
of his Royal Mistress, he immediately built two small wings to his
house.

His health began to fail during the later years of his life, and he
became distressingly corpulent; but he was as diligent in his work, and
his temper remained as kind, and his wit as bright as ever.

After having held the Great Seal more than twenty years, this able
statesman and faithful counsellor was suddenly removed from this life
by the following accident:

He was under the hands of his barber, and the weather being rather
sultry, although February, Sir Nicholas, who suffered much from heat by
reason of his great size, caused the window before him to be opened. He
presently fell asleep, but after a time, a current of cold air blowing
upon him, he awoke shivering and feeling very ill.

"Why," said he to his servant, "did you suffer me to sleep thus
exposed?"

The man replied that he durst not venture to disturb him.

"Then," said the Lord Keeper, "by your civility I lose my life." And so
indeed it proved. He was removed immediately to his bed-chamber, and
was tended with loving care, but he expired a very few days after being
taken ill.

Sir Nicholas was twice married. By his first wife, Jane, daughter of
William Fernley, he had three sons, who died young, and three daughters.

By his second wife, Anne, daughter of Sir Anthony Cooke, a woman
distinguished alike for her beauty, her piety, and her learning, he
had two sons, of whom the youngest, Francis, became so celebrated
as Chancellor, philosopher, and writer; a man whose exceptionally
brilliant gifts have thrown comparatively into the shade the far more
elevated character of his father.

Happy would it have been for the son, if, with his father's talents,
he had inherited his father's unswerving integrity and noble sense of
honour.

Far happier would have been the closing years of Lord Bacon's life had
he, like his father, Sir Nicholas, dealt righteously with all men.




SIR WILLIAM GASCOIGNE.


It is not unusual to find amongst ancient families that the same
Christian name is retained from generation to generation, constantly
descending for centuries in unbroken succession.

Sometimes this name is preserved in memory of a distinguished ancestor.
Sometimes from respect to some prince or powerful patron who had
conferred honour or lands upon the family.

Many have supposed that the name of William came to this country at
the time of the Norman Conquest. It has been ascertained, however,
that long before that date it was in common use in Saxon families,
especially amongst those who inhabited the Northern Counties.

This name William is a German word, and, according to Martin Luther, of
compound meaning.

_Helm_, signifying "defence;" and _Kenhelm_, "Defence of kindred."

_Willy_, _Villi_, or _Billi_ with the Germans, like _Poly_ amongst the
Greeks, before several names indicates "many," consequently _Wilhelm_,
now softened into _William_, means "Much defence" or "Defence of many."

Not only did the Normans, who had settled here when their Duke became
King of England, call their sons after their victorious sovereign,
but many of the old lords of the soil, who, wearied with Harold's
tyranny, had gladly welcomed the advent of the foreign prince, gave
their children the name now so much in vogue. In addition to this
compliment to their new King, some of the Saxon Thanes and great landed
proprietors moulded their rougher Northern surnames into courtly
Norman terminations.

Thus Gaskin, an old West Riding family, Normanised itself into
Gascoigne.

As time went on, this Royal name of William was regularly transmitted
from father to son amongst those families who depended upon the
Conqueror or his line, or who had received gifts of offices, lands,
seignories, or privileges, until in a few years it became so common
amongst those of high rank, that at a certain festival given at the
Court of King Henry II., when Sir William St. John and Sir William
Fitz-Hamon, two especial officers, commanded that none "but those of
the name of William should dine in the Great Chamber with them," they
were accompanied by a hundred and twenty Williams, all knights.

Sir William Gascoigne, Chief Justice of the King's Bench in 1401, the
second year of the reign of King Henry IV., was the eighth Sir William
in lineal descent, and was succeeded, as we learn from Dugdale and
Fuller, by seven more Sir Williams, all knights.

The Chief Justice was born in 1350, _temp._ Edward III., at Gawthorp,
in the parish of Harwood, between Leeds and Knaresborough.

Sir William was the eldest of five brothers. He married twice: first,
Elizabeth, daughter and heiress of Alexander Mowbray, and by her had
an only son, Sir William Gascoigne, of Gawthorp, a brave commander in
the wars under King Henry V. His descendant, the last Sir William of
this branch, married Beatrice, daughter of Sir Richard Tempest, and
had four sons, all of whom died young, and one daughter, Margaret,
his sole heir, in whom the Gascoignes of this line terminated. This
daughter married, in 1552, Thomas Wentworth, of Wentworth Woodhouse,
in Yorkshire, and brought great estates into that family. Thomas
Wentworth was Sheriff for Yorkshire in the twenty-fourth year of Queen
Elizabeth, and had, besides four daughters, an only son, who became
afterwards Sir William Wentworth, and was the father of Thomas, first
Earl of Strafford.

The Chief Justice married, secondly, Joan, daughter of Sir William
Pickering, and widow of Sir Ralph Graystock, Baron of the Exchequer.
By this marriage Sir William had also an only son, James Gascoigne,
settled at Cardington, in Bedfordshire. A descendant of this James
Gascoigne, the inheritrix of Cardington, married her distant cousin
William, a younger son of the Gascoignes of Gawthorp.

This William Gascoigne was Sheriff for Bedfordshire in 1506, _temp._
King Henry VII., and was Sheriff for Buckinghamshire in the fifth
year of King Henry VIII. He was subsequently knighted by Henry VIII.,
and became Comptroller of the Household to Cardinal Wolsey; for the
great Cardinal in many respects affected Royal state, and succeeded
in having the chief offices of his household held by nobles, or by
men of gentle birth. This branch of the Gascoignes also terminated
in a daughter, Dorothy, who married Sir Jarrett Harvye; thus the
direct descendants of the famous Chief Justice became merged in other
families. Of collateral descendants, however, there are many; Nicholas
Gascoigne of Lavingcroft, Sir William's next brother, having left a
numerous family of sons and daughters, who married amongst the Percys,
Latimers, Vavasours, etc.

From the eldest son of this Nicholas descended a somewhat celebrated
man, Richard Gascoigne, who was not only a learned antiquary and
collector, but who has done good service to the history of this country
by having brought before the public in 1638 Mr. Dugdale, whose writings
have given much interesting and important information.

The greater part of the valuable collections made by Richard Gascoigne
is now at Wentworth Woodhouse, Yorkshire. There are also relics of the
Gascoigne family at Ickwellbury, Bedfordshire.

William Gascoigne became a student of the Law at Gray's Inn, and was
early enrolled a member of that learned Society. His career was both
brilliant and rapid. Towards the end of the reign of King Richard II.
he was already so eminent in his profession that, in 1398, he was made
one of the King's Serjeants.

There are records of many transactions at this period, all of which
give proof, not only of Gascoigne's great abilities as a lawyer, but
also testify to the esteem in which he was held on account of the
fidelity and uprightness of his advice, and the invariable justice
of his decisions. His great merits caused him to be appointed one of
the Commissioners for Henry of Lancaster, Duke of Hereford, when this
Prince was about to go into banishment.

Gascoigne had to watch over the interests and receive all moneys that
might come to the Duke during his absence from England. A most onerous
appointment, involving not only considerable difficulty but also no
inconsiderable danger, for in those turbulent days the law of might
frequently warred most successfully against the law of right.

So early as the second year of the reign of King Henry IV., Gascoigne
was made Chief Justice of the King's Bench, and we find that in
1403 Judge Gascoigne and Ralph Nevill, Earl of Westmoreland, were
commissioned by the King to levy and assemble forces in the counties
of York and Northumberland in order to quell the insurrection of Henry
Percy, Earl of Northumberland.

Somewhat later these Commissioners were also empowered to treat with
this same rebellious Earl.

When Archbishop Scrope and others were taken in arms against the King,
His Majesty would have had Gascoigne immediately to give sentence
of death against the contumacious Archbishop; but the Chief Justice
refused, resolutely declaring he would not pronounce such a sentence
in so irregular and illegal a manner. This refusal brought upon him
the King's high displeasure, but the people praised him much for his
justice and his moderation.

Again, when certain abbots, priors, knights, esquires, and other
persons of distinction had been wrongfully accused, and were suffering
imprisonment in consequence of the evidence of a perjured witness,
Sir William detected the fraud. He then caused the false witness to
be exposed and condemned, and obtained the release of the guiltless
persons.

About this time, also, attorneys, by reason of their multitude, and
from their malpractices, had grown to be a public nuisance. Chief
Justice Gascoigne caused an Act to be passed limiting their number in
every county. They had also to swear every Term that they would deal
faithfully and truly by their clients, and could it be proved that they
had not done so they were liable to be imprisoned for a twelve-month
and condemned to pay a ransom according to the King's pleasure.

In the abstract of the Parliament rolls there is a lone insertion
made of a curious and important case referred in part to the judgment
of the Chief Justice. William, Lord Roos of Hamalake, brought an
action against Sir Robert Therwit, one of the Justices of the King's
Bench, inasmuch as he had withheld certain manors and commons in the
county of Lincoln, and that he had lain in wait with five hundred men
to seize or apprehend the said Lord. Sir Robert confessed his fault
before the King, and offered to abide by the award of two Lords of the
complainant's kindred.

These two Lords made a long judgment, and amongst other items enjoined
that Sir Robert should make a great feast at Milton-le-Roos. That for
this feast he should prepare two fat oxen, twelve sheep, two tuns of
Gascon wine, and other provisions. That he should then assemble there
all such knights, esquires, and yeomen as had been his accomplices.
That they should then confess their fault to Lord Roos, craving his
pardon, and offering him five hundred marks as compensation. Lord Roos
should refuse this sum, but he should pardon them, and partake of their
dinner.

The arbitration respecting the land however, which was the point of the
greatest difficulty, was to be referred to Sir William Gascoigne, the
Chief Justice.

But the event which became so noticeable in legal and in historical
annals, is a remarkable circumstance that has been described by many
writers, namely, his having committed the Heir Apparent to the Throne,
Prince Henry, to prison for contempt of Court.

A story so extraordinary has of course been seized upon by dramatists
and poets, who have so embellished the original history, that they have
caused the fact to be doubted by some. However, the affair has been too
simply related by some of our best historians and other grave writers
to permit reasonable doubts that the circumstance did actually take
place as recorded.

It appears that a servant of Prince Henry's being arraigned at
Westminster before Chief Justice Gascoigne for felony, the Prince,
hearing of the matter, came hastily into Court, and commanded that his
follower should be unfettered and set at liberty immediately.

This demand was refused, the Chief Justice exhorting the Prince to be
patient, for his servant was to be tried according to the ancient laws
of the realm, adding that even in case the rigour of the law should
condemn the accused, His Highness might still obtain the gracious
pardon of the King, his father.

Far from being appeased by this answer, the anger of the Prince
seemed only the more inflamed, and striding fiercely to the Bar, he
endeavoured to rescue the prisoner by force.

Thereupon the Judge, with admirable courage and intrepidity, commanded
the Prince to forbear and to depart on his way; but the Prince's rage
at being thus thwarted made him quite beside himself, and, turning
hastily towards the Bench, he either struck, or endeavoured to strike,
the Chief Justice.

At so unparalleled an insult the Court was stricken with horror, and
many threw themselves around the Judge, fearing the Prince was about to
slay him, but Sir William, nothing moved by the affront that had been
offered to him, nor by the peril in which he was placed, never stirred
from his seat, and with dignified calm, and with a bold and assured
countenance, said to the Prince:

"Sir, remember yourself. I keep here the place of your Sovereign Lord
and father, to whom you owe double obedience. Wherefore in his name
I charge you, desist from your wilfulness, and from this unlawful
enterprise. From henceforth give good example to them, who hereafter
will be your own subjects. And now, for your contempt and disobedience,
go you to the prison of the King's Bench, whereunto I commit you, and
remain there a prisoner, until the pleasure of the King your father be
further known."

So dignified was the Judge's bearing, so noble and calm were his few
coercive sentences, wherein were combined the paternal authority of the
King, and the awful gravity of the Judge, that the Prince was instantly
subdued.

His Highness at once laid aside his weapon, and doing reverence to
the Court, he straightway withdrew, and submitted to the disgraceful
punishment--a punishment degrading indeed to a Prince, the Heir
Apparent to the Throne, but well merited from the outrageous insult
that had led to it.

When some officious persons represented the affair to the King in such
a manner that His Majesty might well have taken offence at it, the wise
monarch, the wise father, defeated the ill-will of the informers by
"thanking God, who had given him not only a judge who could minister,
but also a son who could obey justice."

Prince Henry had been carefully educated and governed at the University
of Oxford, and was afterwards for some years engaged with his father's
armies in stilling the commotions constantly taking place on the
borders of Wales. He seems to have done well also when first appointed
President of the Council, for again our old chronicler tells us that
the Commons voted him thanks for his good employment of the treasure;
but, unhappily, before his Royal father's death he abandoned himself
to dissolute courses, and made discreditable associates his intimate
companions and friends.

After his father's death, however, on ascending the throne as Henry
V., he discarded his unworthy followers, and applied himself with both
assiduity and talent to the government of his kingdom.

We learn from Tressel's continuation of "Daniel's Collection of the
History of England, 1641," that the King, addressing himself to his
former friends, said:

"It was sufficient that for many years he had fashioned himself
according to their unruly dispositions, and had wandered with them in
a wilderness of riot and unthriftiness; whereby he had made himself
almost an alien to the hearts of his father and allies, and had so
disparaged himself, that in the eyes of mankind his presence was
grown vulgar and stale, and like the cuckoo in June, was heard but not
regarded." The King then proceeds to relate in brief, that when one
of his associates was summoned before the Lord Chief Justice he had
interposed, and had even struck the Judge, and that for this offence he
had deservedly been committed to prison by the Chief Justice. The King
thus terminates his speech: "For which act of justice I shall ever hold
him worthy of the place and of my favour. I wish all my judges to have
the like undaunted courage to punish offenders of what rank soever."

It is greatly to the honour of Henry V. that the brave and good old
Chief Justice retained his post until age and infirmities compelled him
to relinquish it.

Sir William Gascoigne appeared in his place in Parliament and sat in
Court in Westminster Hall during the first year of the reign of King
Henry V. But his long and arduous career had aged him before the
allotted threescore years and ten that are given to man, and in 1413 he
quitted public life.

He did not long survive his retirement, but, after a short illness,
expired within a year of his resignation.

His funeral was celebrated with the magnificence due to his eminent
dignity, his honourable family, his large fortune, and his exalted fame.

On a stately monument in Harwood Church, Yorkshire, where he was
interred, he is represented lying at full length, attired in his
judge's robes, with a hood drawn over his head. At his right side is a
long dagger; on the left, a purse fastened to his girdle. One of his
wives lies beside him. There are the remains of an inscription cut in
brass around the edge of the tomb. Unfortunately, during the Civil Wars
much of this brass-work was torn away.

In the east window of the same church there still remain some portions
of the ancient glass, and in this glass can be traced the figure of a
man arrayed in the scarlet robes of a judge. Both on his right hand and
on his left is the figure of a kneeling woman, and above these three
figures are the arms of the Gascoigne family, and also those of the
Mowbrays and of the Pickerings.




LORD BURLEIGH.


William Cecil, Baron of Burleigh, Burghley, or Burley, for some time
Secretary of State during the reigns of Edward VI. and Queen Elizabeth,
and eventually Lord High Treasurer of England, was one of the ablest
statesmen, one of the worthiest ministers that England, or indeed, any
other country, has ever possessed.

He was born at Bourne, in Lincolnshire, in 1520, and was educated at
the Grammar Schools of Grantham and Stamford.

He was then sent to St. John's College, Cambridge, where, finding
himself associated with several young men of much talent, he was seized
with such a vehement passion for learning, that it is related of him
that he hired the bell-ringer to call him up every morning at four
o'clock.

Unfortunately, he applied himself with too much zeal to his studies,
for, by neglecting to take due precautions to keep himself in health,
he brought on a severe illness, of which he was with difficulty cured.

Amongst other painful disorders, want of exercise caused his legs to
swell to an immense size; and his physicians always declared that this
distressing illness laid the foundation of the severe attacks of gout
from which he suffered greatly during the latter years of his life.

However, during his youth, no amount of suffering could subdue his
passion for learning.

He doubtless loved knowledge for the sake of acquiring knowledge; but,
at the same time, it is evident from the notes he made, that a keen
desire to excel all his companions and contemporaries was one of the
chief spurs to his exertions.

At sixteen he read a "Lecture on Sophistry," and at nineteen he had
written a lecture in Greek, a very remarkable circumstance, even
amongst students at this time, as there were but few men, either at
Cambridge or elsewhere, who were so perfectly masters of Greek that
they could write and deliver a discourse in that language.

From Cambridge he proceeded to Gray's Inn, where he soon attracted
attention, both by his energy and by the assiduity with which he
applied himself to the intricate study of the law.

He was happy in the possession of two excellent qualities, qualities
not often found united in the same person, sound judgment, and a
remarkably retentive memory. He strengthened these powers not only by
indefatigable application, but also by his habit of recording with his
pen every incident or remark that appeared to him worthy of notice,
both when reading or from observation. The prodigious number of notes
he has left behind him, testify to the marvellous industry and care
with which he devoted himself to any subject of interest.

He also seized every opportunity of meeting and conversing with clever
men, delighting much in free disputes upon all sorts of subjects, by
which means he early became an eloquent and a correct speaker.

He had originally intended to adopt the Law as a profession, but chance
introduced him to the knowledge of, and led to his obtaining the favour
of his Sovereign.

Happening one day to pay a visit to his father, who was at that time
Master of the Robes to the King, he met there two priests, chaplains
to O'Neill, a famous Irish Chief, who was then at the English Court.
Falling into a violent dispute with them, touching the supremacy of the
Pope, young Cecil displayed so much skill in the argument, which was
carried on in Latin, that the circumstance came to the King's ears.

Henry, who was one of the most learned princes of the age, and who
delighted in learned people, desired to see the young man who had
evinced such remarkable talent, and was so favourably impressed with
Cecil's good manners and good conversation, that he presently gave him
the reversion of the post of _Custos brevium_.

This early introduction to Court led to an alteration of plans with
respect to the Law; and as Cecil's marriage, which took place soon
afterwards, with the daughter of Sir John Cheeks, brought him to the
notice of the Duke of Somerset, he resolved to devote himself to the
career that was now open to him.

The Protector, the Duke of Somerset, took him into great favour, and
soon appointed him Master of Requests, a position of considerable
importance; and in 1547 still further promoted him by advancing him to
the dignity of a Secretary of State.

As another mark of regard the Protector allowed Cecil to accompany him
to Scotland--a proof of affection that had well-nigh cost the young
statesman his life. At the battle of Musselburgh Cecil must have been
killed in the _mêlée_, had not one of his friends saved him at the
expense of losing his own arm.

Within a year after the Scottish expedition the Duke of Somerset fell
into disgrace, and Cecil, sharing in the misfortunes of his friend and
patron, was also sent to prison, where he remained three months. On the
accession of Elizabeth, however, he was not only set at liberty, but
he was reinstated in his office of Secretary of State, and in 1561 the
additional appointment of Master of Wards was conferred upon him.

Notwithstanding all these dignities and emoluments, his life at this
time was a sorely troubled one. Not only did factious opposition
distract both the Government and the Kingdom, but endless conspiracies
were formed that threatened each one of the Ministry. Like the old
fable of the dragon's teeth, no sooner was one plot discovered and
crushed than another arose in its place.

In Leicester also Cecil had a powerful and formidable rival; but the
favourite, unfortunately for himself, was intemperate in speech, and
rash and violent in action.

Cecil, on the contrary, was remarkable, not only for the control he
possessed over his temper during political controversies, but also
for the moderation of the opinions he gave to the world. All men also
agreed that he was eminently just.

The Queen, therefore, was far too clear-sighted not to perceive how
valuable a minister, how judicious a counsellor she had in Cecil.
The Queen also saw plainly that Cecil's interests were intimately
interwoven with her own; and this wise Sovereign perfectly understood
that he was fitted to be her adviser and her minister whose personal
welfare, and indeed safety, depended upon the _success_ of the counsels
that he gave.

Thus, amidst all the political storms and tempests that convulsed these
troubled times, Cecil, by his skill and prudence, steered both himself
and his Royal Mistress safely through the rocks and shoals by which
they were surrounded. Others rose and fell, but Cecil ever maintained
his position, and year by year gained fresh honours.

In 1571 he was raised to the Peerage by the title of Baron Burleigh.
He was soon afterwards appointed Lord High Treasurer, and the great
distinction of the Garter was bestowed upon him.

But while his public life was thus brilliant, his heart was bowed down
by domestic affliction. His first wife had lived but a few years, and
after her death he married Mildred, daughter of Sir Anthony Cooke and
elder sister of Anne Cooke, afterwards Lady Bacon.

These sisters were remarkable for their beauty, their accomplishments,
and their learning. They were well skilled in music, could converse
in many foreign tongues, and in their knowledge of Latin and Greek
were equal to some of the most famous scholars of the day. Both these
fair and charming women not only obtained but succeeded in keeping the
strong love of their husbands.

After a married life of forty-three years, the loss of the wife he had
so fondly loved rendered Lord Burleigh a broken-hearted man. His health
gave way under the excess of his affliction, and, for the first time
during his long and arduous career, he felt himself unable to perform
the duties of his office.

He became changed in many ways. The brightness and cheerfulness of his
temper left him. He grew silent and melancholy, and from the sad hour
when she, who had been the angel in his house, was taken from him, he
never regained that sunny hopefulness of disposition that in happier
days had been one of his peculiar characteristics.

He entreated the Queen to allow him to resign, for he desired now to
spend the remainder of his days in quiet and retirement; but Elizabeth,
well aware that his abilities were as brilliant as ever, was unwilling
to part with her most trusted counsellor.

He yielded to the Royal command, and from this time laboured if
possible more assiduously than ever, giving himself neither rest nor
relaxation. Notwithstanding such prodigious exertions, and the acute
sufferings he endured from attacks of gout, his life was prolonged
beyond the usual age of man.

His last memorable public act was endeavouring to give peace to his
country, when reasonable terms might have been obtained from Spain.

These terms, though considered reasonable by Burleigh, were violently
opposed by the Earl of Essex; who, having gained some reputation by the
sword, was unwilling to favour peace.

He, in fact, expressed himself in such passionate language, that
the Lord Treasurer, after listening for a considerable time in calm
silence, was at length moved to say, "that the noble Lord seemed intent
on nothing but blood and slaughter."

Then he pulled out a prayer-book, and with a dignity befitting his age
and experience, and with an earnestness that deeply impressed those
around, he pointed to the following words: "Men of blood shall not live
out half their days." This was his last appearance in public.

Never again did Lord Burleigh attend either Council or Parliament,
but even when confined to his bed during the last trying and suffering
illness, he prepared and settled a new treaty between the Queen and the
States, whereby this nation was relieved of an expense of one hundred
and twenty thousand pounds per annum.

Then, having filled the highest and most important offices of State, in
the seventy-eighth year of his age, calmly and peacefully, about five
o'clock in the morning of the 4th of August, 1598, surrounded by his
children and grandchildren, his dearest friends, and by many old and
faithful servants, he passed away from this life, full of years, rich
in honours, at peace with all men, and humbly trusting by the mercy of
his God, he should again see her whom he had so passionately loved.

The history of Burleigh's life is the history of England during one of
the most anxious and troubled, but also one of the most memorable and
glorious periods this country has ever known.

For forty years this great statesman guided the helm of Government, and
although the Queen from time to time allowed others to have influence
with her, yet whenever difficulties arose or matters occurred of more
than ordinary moment, it was in her long-tried and faithful Minister
that Elizabeth invariably confided.

The moderate views, the calm foresight and wisdom of this consummate
politician, caused him not only to be regretted after his death, but to
be valued during his life, a good fortune that but rarely falls to the
lot of even the most celebrated political leaders.

Burleigh deserved, and he obtained, the esteem and respect both of
his Sovereign and of her people, and from the beginning to the end of
his glorious career, however much men may have differed from him in
opinion, they ever acknowledged his honesty of purpose, his hearty love
for his country, and his earnest desire to increase both her prosperity
and her renown.

At this distance of time, when subsequent events have shown the fallacy
of most of the hopes and fears that then influenced mankind, many may
see reason to disapprove of his policy; but it must be remembered that
in the sixteenth century swords were more readily drawn than they now
are. Measures that to-day seem needlessly harsh, were often forced upon
statesmen of that period by the fears and also suspicions of their own
partisans.

Not only was Burleigh gifted with talents beyond the ordinary
endowments of men, but in all outward seeming Nature had been lavish in
her kindly gifts to him. Well-shaped, handsome, and graceful in person,
he also possessed in no common degree that winning charm of manner that
not only gains the affection of friends, but which also adds such
especial happiness to the intercourse of domestic life.

His mode of living was such as became a man of high rank, entertaining
with magnificent hospitality all those who, from rank, merit, and
talent, were entitled to his acquaintance. To every one who came to his
house he was courteous and cheerful, for he held that a host should
not, by silent or reserved behaviour, mar the enjoyment of his guests.

Whenever he could obtain a little relaxation from the press of public
business, he would hasten to the country, for his great delight was to
improve and beautify both his family seat at Burleigh and his house
and gardens at Theobalds; but above all he loved Theobalds, and, as
he expresses it, always fled there whenever it was possible to bury
himself in its delightful privacy.

Lord Burleigh had also two other places of residence--his lodgings at
Court, and his house on the Strand. In his house in London he had
fifty persons of his family, and his expenses there, he writes to
a friend, were thirty pounds a week when absent, and between forty
and fifty when present. At Theobalds he had thirty persons of his
household. Besides the sum he gave away in charity, he directed that
ten pounds a week were always to be laid out in keeping the "poor" at
work in his gardens. His stables cost him about a thousand marks a year.

In his service, or, rather, in his household, he had ever young men of
much distinction, they deeming it an honour to serve him.

Besides his customary hospitality, he several times entertained the
Queen sumptuously, and at an expense of many thousand pounds.

He built three fine houses--one in London, on the Strand, another at
Theobalds, and a third at Burleigh. All these houses were, though
large and grand, still more remarkable from their neatness and general
convenience.

Though thus spending both liberally and magnificently, Burleigh was
ever prudent and careful. He took good heed as to how his money went.
He kept rigid accounts, and attended carefully, even minutely, to all
domestic matters.

Writing to a friend respecting household arrangements, he says:

"My house of Burghley is of my mother's inheritance, who liveth and is
the owner thereof. I am but a farmer; yet, when I am in the country, I
must buy my grain, my beef, my mutton; and, for my stable, I buy my hay
for the greatest part, my oats and my straw totally."

When in the country he loved to walk about and talk to the country
folk, and would often stop to soothe little children in their troubles,
or watch them in their play, so gentle was his temper, so abundant was
his good-nature.

At his death, notwithstanding his liberal and magnificent expenditure,
and though he was so little avaricious that he made less during his
forty years of office than most men at that period would have made in
seven, so prudently had he managed his affairs, that he left about
£4,000 a year in land, £11,000 in money, and about £14,000 in valuable
effects.




SIR EDWARD COKE.


Although Sir Edward Coke, Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench during
the reign of James I., was not a member of the Ancient and Honourable
Society of Gray's Inn, yet, as his portrait hangs in the Great Hall,
and as he occupied himself much in the affairs of this Inn of Court, a
few words respecting this eminent lawyer may not be misplaced here.

There has probably never been a more consummate master of his
profession than Sir Edward Coke. His interest in it amounted to
enthusiasm. He loved to grapple with every legal difficulty, and
brought to bear upon all its intricate technicalities a dispassionate
calmness that unfortunately failed him in the ordinary affairs of life.
For this reason he was even a greater man during the periods of his
disgrace than when most triumphant.

During these seasons of enforced retirement he could devote himself to
a subject that he loved, and with which he was thoroughly conversant,
whereas the too great energy of his character, whilst in the enjoyment
of successful power, led to his giving way to intemperate violence both
of expression and action.

Like most distinguished lawyers, success came to him early in life. One
of his first cases was a remarkable one, and brought him much credit.

Mr. Edward Denny was Vicar of Northlinham in Norfolk, and the then
Lord Cromwell, who lived in the neighbourhood, procured two persons to
preach several sermons in Mr. Denny's church.

Both these persons took the opportunity thus afforded them of
inveighing against the Book of Common Prayer, styling it superstitious
and impious.

For this reason, the Vicar, having learnt they had no license, when one
of them came next to preach would have prevented him, but the man being
protected by Lord Cromwell insisted on preaching, and did preach.

This proceeding caused warm words to pass between Lord Cromwell and the
Vicar, the former saying:

"Thou art a false varlet, and I like not of thee."

To which the latter replied:

"It is no marvel that you like not of me, as you like those others"
(meaning the preachers) "that maintain sedition against the Queen's
proceedings."

Upon this Lord Cromwell brought an action against the Vicar, _de
scandalis magnatum_. The defendant justified, thereupon the plaintiff
demurred, and the bar was held insufficient; but upon a motion in
arrest of judgment, that the declaration was insufficient, the Court
gave judgment for the defendant.

Lord Cromwell then brought another action, and so the matter went on
for years until Coke became engaged in the case, and he so skilfully
seized the opportunity of managing and reporting it that his name was
at once brought favourably before the public.

His marriage with Bridgett, daughter and co-heiress of John Paxton,
Esq., a lady, with whom he had £35,000, and who was allied to some
of the most powerful families in the kingdom, doubtless aided him in
his career, although in after life he was wont to boast that he had
triumphed neither by "pen nor purse," signifying thereby that he had
never craved any man's help, nor had he ever opened his purse to buy
any place.

His perfect knowledge of the laws of England, and his wonderful memory
in recalling every technical circumstance bearing on or connected with
those laws, was something marvellous. For this reason his judgments on
all legal points have ever been held to be of exceeding value.

Unhappily in criminal trials his warmth of temper and his violence of
language tended much to injure his reputation and to lessen him in
the opinion of the world. Still, in spite of these great defects, his
unequalled talents forced men to yield to his judgment, and however
much they might condemn him they bowed to his will.

A notable instance of this occurred during the famous trial of Sir
Walter Raleigh.

Sir Edward Coke, who was then Attorney-General, conducted the case on
behalf of the Crown, and expressed himself with such energy against the
prisoner, that Lord Cecil at length interfered and desired him to be
more patient.

Much offended, Coke at once sat down, and preserved an angry silence.
At length the Commissioners were compelled to entreat him to continue
his address. For some time he refused; then suddenly rising, with a
power and skill that electrified all present, he recapitulated the
charges. So powerful were his words, so lucid were his arguments, that
it was evident from that moment that the prisoner's doom was sealed.

The scene that day in the Court at Winchester, where the trial took
place, must have been alike impressive and sorrowful.

The handsome, gallant Sir Walter Raleigh, the quondam favourite of the
Queen, for years the popular hero of the nation, now worn and bent by
age and many troubles, is standing at the bar, to be tried for his
life, accused of treason against his Sovereign and against his country.

Brave he has ever been, brave he is now, and the noble face, though
pale and haggard, is stern and composed. Unmoved in look or action, he
listens attentively to the words of one who is urging the Judges, with
all the might of burning eloquence, to pronounce him worthy of death.

Perchance for one moment a gleam of hope may have entered the
prisoner's breast when he heard Lord Cecil speak, but if so, it must
have been speedily dispelled when the Attorney-General addressed the
Court.

Spare in form, exquisitely neat in dress, passionate in action and
emphasis, the fiery and searching eye of the great lawyer seems to scan
alike the thoughts as well as the faces of those on whom he looks. And
his voice, deep yet penetrating, has a ring that stirs men's hearts,
and brings conviction in its very accents.

With terrible minuteness, and with crushing legal skill, he states
every circumstance that can tell against the accused, and each
powerfully-worded sentence that fell from the lips of the Counsel for
the Crown must, to the friends of the unhappy man, have been as another
nail driven into the coffin that awaited him.

Long ere that famous speech was ended, hope and suspense must have been
over for the prisoner. The evidence against him had been slender, but
Coke's eloquence prevailed. Sir Walter was found guilty, and condemned
to death.

For a month he lay in prison, daily expecting his execution. Then he
was reprieved, and sent to the Tower, where he remained a prisoner for
sixteen long years.

After his release, he organised an expedition to Guiana, but, failing
in this, he returned to England, where he was soon after seized,
imprisoned, and beheaded, not for any fresh crime or misdemeanour, but
solely on the strength of his former trial and condemnation nineteen
years previously. He was executed in Old Palace Yard, 1618, and died,
as he had lived, a brave and resolute man.

Coke's speech on this occasion, and also another made at the trial of
Sir Everard Digby, are masterpieces of skill and intelligence; but,
although such brilliant displays of eloquence and learning increased
his reputation as a lawyer, or rather as an orator, it was felt by the
world in general that he had permitted himself a license of expression
not seemly in one who held so high and responsible a position.

These speeches, nevertheless, led to his promotion, for soon afterwards
he was appointed Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.

This place fulfilled all his ambition, and here he would have willingly
remained, but his bitter tongue, his caustic remarks, his intolerance
of the least opposition, made him many enemies, many detractors.

His foes calculated that were he placed in a position of greater power,
and therefore of greater prominence, his many faults of temper would,
notwithstanding his profound legal knowledge, speedily lead to his
downfall.

They suggested, therefore, that his talents merited a higher post, and
after a time they succeeded in having him raised to the more elevated,
but, in those days, perilous position of Chief Justice of the King's
Bench, or as he styled himself, Chief Justice of England.

They calculated, and the result showed they were correct, that
on account of the class of cases ordinarily brought within the
jurisdiction of the King's Bench, the Chief Justice would ere long find
himself at antagonism with the Court.

The annals of the Law Courts at this period of English history are
terrible to read. It is frightful to see on what slight grounds men
were accused, tried, convicted, and executed for treason.

Verily, in those days our laws appeared to have been written in blood;
but, notwithstanding their severity, it was for having shown too great
_leniency_ in an affair that occurred about two years after he was made
Chief Justice that Sir Edward lost the King's favour.

This extraordinary and dreadful business was the discovery that Sir
Thomas Overbury had been murdered in the Tower, and as light was
gradually thrown on this dark matter, it became more and more evident
that great and powerful personages were deeply implicated, not only
in the foul murder, but also in other crimes of the most heinous and
disgraceful description.

In tracing and detecting the secrets of this black business, Lord Chief
Justice Coke showed so much zeal and diligence that he succeeded in
having apprehended and brought to justice some of the (apparently)
principal culprits, in spite, not only of the attempts that were
first made to enable them to escape, but of the influence that was
afterwards employed to stay their execution.

Richard Weston, who had been Overbury's keeper in the Tower, was early
brought to trial. At first he seemed resolved to be silent on every
subject, induced thereto, it is said, by an immense bribe from the Earl
of Somerset, but at length he was prevailed on to plead.

Poor wretch, the "persuasions" to which he yielded were the thumbscrew
and the rack, but no sooner did he plead than he was speedily convicted
and executed. Even at the foot of the gallows the miserable creature
was not left in peace. Lord Clare, Sir John Wentworth, and Mr. Lumsden
(friends of Somerset) attended him to the scaffold, and vehemently
urged him to declare, in these his last moments, that a conspiracy had
been concocted against Somerset.

So evident was it that Overbury's murder concealed even darker secrets,
and that these secrets implicated powerful and therefore formidable
personages, that Sir Edward, with his keen legal foresight, early
foresaw peril. So imminent, indeed, did he consider the danger, that
he went to the King at Royston to beg His Majesty would appoint a
commission to assist him during the necessary investigations, and thus
in some degree enable him to share the onus with others.

It has been hinted by some historians that the King knew more about
this hateful matter than he cared to acknowledge.

James I. was a shrewd and prudent man; he was timid also, and ever
shrank from allowing his name to be involved in any way with affairs
that would be distasteful to, or unpopular amongst, his newly-acquired
people. His shrewdness and his fears, however, led in several instances
to his acting in both a cowardly and a treacherous manner.

In this case, whatever may have been the knowledge the King possessed,
he skilfully concealed his suspicions from the chief person implicated.
When informed of Overbury's murder, without a moment's delay he
despatched a messenger to the Chief Justice, desiring him to arrest
Lord Somerset.

Sir Edward Coke at that time lived in the Temple, and so methodically
did he measure out his time, that every hour had its appointed usage.
One of his rules was to go to bed at nine of the clock, and to rise at
three in the morning.

The Royal messenger arrived at the Temple about 1 a.m., and at once
proceeded to Sir Edward's lodging. Sir Edward's son was there, and also
some friends, but the Chief Justice was in bed.

Mr. Coke therefore received the messenger, who said:

"I come, sir, from His Majesty the King, and must have instant speech
with your father."

"Though you come from the King," said Mr. Coke, "you cannot and shall
not see my father, for if he be disturbed in his sleep he will not
be fit for any business; but if you will do as we do, you shall be
welcome. In two hours my father will rise, and you can then do as you
please."

To this proposal the messenger was compelled to assent, so he waited.

At three o'clock, Sir Edward rang a little bell to give notice to his
servant to come to him.

The Royal messenger then entered, and gave the King's letter to
the Chief Justice, who at once made out the warrant for Somerset's
apprehension.

The messenger went post-haste back to Royston with the warrant, and on
being introduced into the Royal presence, found the King sitting with
his arm round the favourite's neck.

When the officer with the fatal document entered the room, James was
saying to the man whom he himself was causing to be arrested on a
charge of murder: "When shall I see thee again?" the favourite being
on the eve of his departure for London.

Somerset, when arrested by Sir Edward's warrant, exclaimed indignantly
at the affront thus offered to a peer of the realm, even in the
presence of the King's Majesty. In his anger he appealed to James.

"Nay, man," said the King, "if Coke sends for _me_, I must go."

No sooner, however, was Somerset out of the room, than his wily master
added:

"Now the de'il go with thee, man, for I will never see thy face any
more."

It is difficult to understand what was really the King's belief, or
what were really the King's motives, on this occasion.

To some persons he asserted that he did not believe Somerset had
anything to do with the actual murder. Yet it was he who caused his
favourite to be arrested; and when that arrest had been made and the
Chief Justice had arrived at Royston, the King spoke with exceeding
angry energy, charging Sir Edward to prosecute the affair with the
utmost diligence.

He was to search into the very bottom of the conspiracy, and to spare
no man, however great he might be; the King concluding his adjuration
thus:

"God's curse be upon you and yours if _you_ spare any of them, and
God's curse be upon _me_ and mine, if _I_ spare any one of them."

Not only the Earl of Somerset, but his wife, the young and beautiful
Countess of Somerset, was also arrested as being implicated in the
crime; and whilst their trials were in course of preparation, many
other persons of inferior rank were tried, condemned, and executed.

On the 7th November, Mrs. Anne Turner, who had been about Lady Somerset
from her childhood, was tried, convicted, and hanged.

On the 16th of the same month, Sir George Ellways, Lieutenant of the
Tower, was also convicted, and was hanged on Tower Hill on the 20th.

A week later, namely, on the 27th, James Franklin was tried, convicted,
and, a few days afterwards, hanged.

It might have been supposed that so many trials and executions showed
no want of zeal on the part of the Chief Justice and the other
Commissioners. Yet notwithstanding so sanguinary a list, Sir Edward
fell into disfavour for not hunting down and giving over to the gibbet
more of these miserable victims--victims who in all probability had
been but the creatures and tools of those who were far more deeply
implicated, and far more deeply culpable.

It has been supposed that the friends of Somerset trusted that the
nation would at length weary of so much bloodshed, and that time and
political events would cause the recollection of one black crime to
fade away.

At any rate, the delays which were for ever arising before Lord and
Lady Somerset could be brought to trial, were mainly attributed to the
unwillingness of many great personages (if not actually the Court) to
have certain secret transactions disclosed.

At length, however, the trial took place, Lord Chancellor Ellesmere
sitting as High Steward.

The King's instructions were produced to the Commissioners, by which
they were directed to try, first:

"Whether there were good grounds to believe the Lord and Lady guilty,
and if not, they were then to inquire after the authors of the
conspiracy."

The same instructions were afterwards produced to the Lords, both as
evidence of the King's care and impartiality, and also as proof of the
Commissioners' diligence in this business.

Lady Somerset, who was tried first, gave her judges but little trouble.
Great as had been her position, brilliant as were her surroundings, to
this young and beautiful, but most erring and passionate woman, life
had early lost its charms. She was sated both with its pleasures and
its crimes, and when placed on her trial at once pleaded guilty.

The next day, May 25th, her husband, Lord Somerset, was placed at the
bar, and after a trial that lasted twelve hours, his peers pronounced
the verdict of guilty.

The Lord Chief Justice considered himself entitled to, and, indeed,
gained much credit from the nation generally, for the zeal and
acuteness he had displayed throughout the whole progress of this
terrible and mysterious affair; but though the King had expressed
himself with such vehemence when commanding the matter should be
thoroughly sifted, from the period of this trial Sir Edward fell into
disfavour, both with His Majesty and with all the Royal favourites.

From this moment they, one after another, endeavoured to accomplish his
ruin. They seized every opportunity of misrepresenting his conduct to
the King, and as, unfortunately for the Chief Justice, serious disputes
had arisen both in the Court of Chancery and in the Court of King's
Bench, the proceedings of Coke were impugned on all sides.

His arrogant temper, his haughty manner of speech, the intolerance he
displayed to all who might presume to differ from him, made him many
personal enemies, and created around him a very army of foes.

The very fact, also, of his being so able a lawyer, so consummate a
master of his profession, did but increase the rancour of those whom he
had so haughtily rebuffed.

In all such encounters he almost invariably proved he was right both
in law and in fact, and then the bitter words of his scorn stung the
vanquished like a whip of scorpions.

There were very few persons, therefore, who would not rejoice in
his humiliation and his fall; but amongst his many opponents, the
most inveterate, the most powerful, and the most rancorous, was Lord
Villiers, afterwards Duke of Buckingham.

Sir Edward had opposed with no small decision some matter that
concerned the favourite's imperious will and pleasure, and Villiers
exerted to the utmost his powerful influence to ruin the Chief Justice.

These intrigues resulted in Coke's being suspended from his office on
June 30th, 1616. Sir Randolph Carew was commissioned to go Circuit, and
in the following November, Sir Henry Mountague received the appointment
of Lord Chief Justice.

It was during this enforced retirement from Court and public life,
that Sir Edward Coke's higher qualities exhibited themselves in their
most favourable light, and he showed the world with what calmness and
courage he could support adversity.

The dignity that his vehemence had so often endangered during the days
of his prosperity, now in the hours of adversity never failed him; and
however bitter and undeserved the attacks made upon him, he either
passed them over without notice, or replied to them in words of calm
moderation.

His many legal works, his many letters to friends at this period,
indicate with what resignation, nay, even with what content, he bore
the loss of the power that had been so dear to him. Both his actions
and his words testify how cheerfully he contemplated the end of all his
ambitious projects, and looked forward to a life of complete retirement.

But so admirable a lawyer, so able a judge, was not destined to be
long unemployed.

After his disgrace, men of far inferior talent had been placed in high
stations; but ere much time had elapsed it soon became evident that the
new Ministers and judges were unfit for the places to which they had
been appointed.

When the ship is in danger or in a difficult position, the best pilot,
however disagreeable he may be, must be called to the helm; and thus
even those who had been most active in bringing about Sir Edward's
fall, found it to their own interest to smooth the way towards his
restoration to the King's favour.

For some time there had been serious differences amongst the Ministers,
and at length the quarrel between the Lord Keeper Bacon and Mr.
Secretary Winwood rose to such a pitch that they refused to sit in
Council together.

It was at this juncture that the aid of so talented a man as the late
Chief Justice was imperatively needed.

Unhappily, Coke was not content to let matters take their course,
and to remain quietly on the pedestal he had so deservedly gained
for himself, namely, to rest on his great reputation of being the
soundest and most skilful lawyer in the United Kingdom. He thought to
strengthen his position by an alliance with the family of the still
powerful favourite, the Earl, afterwards the Duke of Buckingham, the
famous "Steenie." For this purpose he negotiated a marriage between
his youngest daughter by his second wife, Lady Hatton, and Sir John
Villiers, the Earl's eldest brother.

Lady Hatton, a proud, violent woman, who was incessantly insulting and
quarrelling with her husband, professed the greatest indignation that
their daughter should be disposed of in marriage without her (Lady
Hatton's) will and pleasure having been consulted in the matter. She
forthwith, therefore, carried off the young lady, and shut her up in
Sir Edmund Withipole's house, near Oatlands.

Sir Edward Coke, highly incensed that his authority should be thus
set at naught, wrote to Lord Buckingham, requesting him to procure
immediately, from the Privy Council, a warrant that would enable him to
regain possession of his daughter. Unfortunately, before the warrant
could be conveyed to him, he had learnt where Miss Coke was, and, with
his usual impetuosity, without waiting for legal powers, he and his
sons proceeded to Sir Edmund Withipole's house and took the young lady
away from thence by force.

Upon this imprudent action, Lady Hatton, who, by her letters, appears
to have been beside herself, so frenzied was she by rage, not only
appealed to the Privy Council, but, by her personal entreaties, gained
over the Lord Keeper Bacon to her side, he, probably, being nothing
loth to have again an opportunity of attacking his old enemy.

Buckingham, however, was not a man to brook contradiction, and
both he and his mother, Lady Compton, treated the Lord Keeper with
extraordinary rudeness. Bitterly angry, the latter appealed to the Star
Chamber, and also filed an information against Sir Edward Coke.

Thus this foolish marriage became a State business, and for many months
the war of words and of law processes raged with exceeding fury. As
might have been expected, the favourite eventually had his way, and,
somehow or other, the two ladies who had been foremost in the fight.
Lady Hatton and Lady Compton, came at length to a good understanding.

The marriage, therefore, was arranged. Sir Edward Coke was admitted to
the presence of the King, and made a member of the Privy Council.

On the Michaelmas Day following, Sir John Villiers was married to Mrs.
Frances Coke at Hampton Court, with all imaginable splendour.

Sir Edward's plans had succeeded. He had been restored to the King's
favour, he had married his daughter to the brother of the Royal
favourite; but he paid dearly for these triumphs. Not only had he to
bestow on his daughter the sum of £10,000, to be paid down in money on
the day of the marriage, but he had to assure to Sir John Villiers a
rent charge of 2,000 marks per annum during his (Sir Edward's) life,
and another one of £900 during Lady Hatton's life.

He engaged, also, to settle the manor of Stoke, in Buckinghamshire, a
property he had destined for his other two daughters, on Sir John and
Lady Villiers and their heirs.

Lady Hatton also had from her private fortune, which was considerable,
to make large settlements upon her daughter.

Lady Hatton, who, by her own showing, must have been an intolerable
woman, self-willed, passionate, and overbearing, had by this time
become reconciled to her son-in-law and his friends; but she still
pursued her quarrel with her husband with unrelenting acrimony.

Many letters still in existence testify to the heat and resentment of
both parties. At length the dispute became quite a public matter, many
persons of consideration interesting themselves keenly on one side or
the other.

So fiercely did the warfare rage between all the partisans, that at one
time Lord Houghton (formerly Sir John Hollis) was committed to prison
for having, in conjunction with Lady Hatton, framed some scandalous
libels respecting Sir Edward Coke.

This most disagreeable and trying wife seems to have lost no
opportunity of insulting her husband both by word and deed. One of her
means of annoyance was to give costly entertainments to the King, the
Duke of Buckingham, and the whole Court, ostentatiously omitting her
husband.

Not only was happiness far from this divided and discordant household,
but the fluctuations in Sir Edward's fortunes were frequent.

During the early session of 1621, important matters occupied the
attention of the House of Commons; liberty of speech, the increase of
Popery, and many popular grievances were eagerly debated.

Sir Edward spoke strongly and warmly on all these questions, and his
speeches are much commended by Camden. However, his views were not
those either of the Court, nor of the favourite, and were indeed so
ill received by the Government, that at the end of the year Coke was
committed to the Tower; his chambers in the Temple were broken open,
and his papers were delivered to Sir Robert Cotton and Mr. Wilson for
examination.

Soon after his committal, Sir Edward was charged with having concealed
circumstances relating to the trial of the Earl of Somerset.

Notwithstanding the assertions of his enemies, nothing could be proved
against him, so after a short imprisonment he was released from the
Tower. He regained his liberty, but at the same time he was made to
understand that he had signally incurred the Royal displeasure. He was
turned out of the Privy Council, the King observing:

"That Sir Edward was the fittest instrument for a tyrant that ever was
in England."

Posterity does not endorse this opinion, because His Majesty's
indignant remark was called forth by Coke's having _resisted_ an undue
exercise of the Royal prerogative.

He was never again reconciled to the Court during the life of King
James, and even when Charles I. came to the throne, efforts were made
to keep him out of Parliament by pricking him for Sheriff.

Sir Edward objected, and successfully, that it would not be seemly
in one who had held the great office of Chief Justice of England, to
attend the judges at the Assizes.

He was subsequently elected Knight of the Shire for Bucks, and during
the sessions of 1628, distinguished himself more than any other man in
Parliament, by his bold and skilful arguments in defence of the liberty
of the subject, by the energy with which he urged upon the Government
the necessity that existed for the redress of many grievances, and by
the strenuous support he gave towards maintaining the privileges of
the House of Commons.

It was during this same Parliament that he did the greatest service to
his country that was, perhaps, ever done by a private man.

He it was who proposed and framed the "Petition of Rights," and it
was Sir Edward Coke also, who successfully vindicated the right of
the House of Commons to proceed against any subject whatever, however
exalted the position of that subject might be.

After the dissolution of this Parliament in 1629, Sir Edward retired to
his country house at Stoke-Pogis, Buckinghamshire, and there he spent
the remainder of his days.

Though his life was prolonged to the great age of eighty-six, he
retained his marvellous memory to the last. Were a passage quoted from
any of his favourite authors, he would remember and mention, not only
the context, but often the page in which the words would be found, and
on all legal matters he would bring forward the papers he had written
on the subjects in question.

His industry in committing to writing everything that interested him
was beyond example, and posterity will never cease to admire his
learned and laborious works on the laws of this country.

He also wrote some religious pamphlets, for he loved much to study the
great doctrines of Christianity. He especially delighted to dwell on
the sublime teachings of Our Lord, and during his last years, when the
interests of this life, with all its pains and pleasures, were rapidly
fading away, he, like Cardinal Wolsey, frequently lamented that he had
not studied Divine laws with the same care and earnestness that he had
devoted to the consideration and thorough understanding of temporal
laws.

Our Saviour's own prayer was the one he best loved, and the last faint
words that were feebly murmured by his dying lips were:

"Thy Kingdom come. Thy will be done."


Sir Edward died September 3rd, 1634, in the eighty-sixth year of his
age.

He left behind him a vast mass of manuscripts and writings of all
sorts, amongst them his will, in which he disposed of his very large
fortune in the manner he judged best, between his children and his
descendants.

On the very day of his death his papers were seized and carried away by
an order from the Privy Council. Amongst other valuable documents was
this will, and it is a remarkable fact, as connected with the wills
of great lawyers, that this will of Sir Edward Coke's was never again
found, to the great prejudice and detriment of his family and heirs.




OTHER EMINENT LAWYERS.


In the long list of eminent lawyers who were members of Gray's Inn, are
to be found the names of three of the Yelverton family: Sir William
Yelverton, Justice of the King's Bench in 1443; Sir Christopher
Yelverton, Justice of the King's Bench in 1602; and also his son, Sir
Henry Yelverton, Justice of the Common Pleas in 1625.

Emblazoned on the glass of the great window in the Hall are the arms
of Guido Fairfax, called Serjeant from Gray's Inn in 1463. Also those
of John Ernelye, Chief Justice of the King's Bench in 1519; of Sir
Anthony de Fitzherbert, Justice of the Common Pleas in 1522; with those
of Lord Riche, whose son Robert, also a member of Gray's Inn, was, in
1618, created Earl of Warwick; of Justice Stamford, Justice of Common
Pleas in 1554, and of Dr. Thomas Wilson, Secretary to Queen Elizabeth
in 1577, and who ultimately succeeded Sir Thomas Smith as Secretary of
State.

Amongst the most ancient escutcheons on the walls are those of Sir
William Gascoigne, Sir John Markham, Chief Justice of the King's Bench
in 1400 and 1462, Lord Burghley, Sir Nicholas and Sir Francis Bacon,
Thomas Moyle, Reader of the Society in 1534, and in 1542 Speaker of the
House of Commons, Thomas Cromwell, afterwards Earl of Essex, of Henry
Cromwell, the second son of the Protector, and of Sir John Holt, Chief
Justice of the King's Bench in 1689.

The following sketch of Lord Chief Justice Holt is given in the
fourteenth number of the _Tatler_:

"He was a man of profound knowledge of the laws of his country, and
as just an observer of them in his own person. He considered justice
as a cardinal virtue, not as a trade for maintenance. Wherever he was
judge, he never forgot that he was also counsel. The criminal before
him was always sure he stood before his country, and, in a sort, before
a parent of it. The prisoner knew that though his spirit was broken
with guilt, and incapable of language to defend itself, all would be
gathered from him which could conduce to his safety, and that his judge
would wrest no law to destroy him, nor conceal any that could save him."

Sir John Fortescue, of whom mention has been made (an ancestor of the
present Lord Fortescue), was Lord High Chancellor of England under
Henry VI.

In 1430 he was made Serjeant-at-Law, in 1441, King's Serjeant. The
following year he became Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench, and
soon afterwards was raised to the dignity of Lord High Chancellor.

But he lost all on the deposition of the King. He was ever faithful to
his old master, and for many years, therefore, remained in exile with
Queen Margaret, and her son, Prince Edward.

When the Queen and the Prince returned to England, Sir John Fortescue
accompanied them, but soon after the decisive battle of Tewkesbury, he
was thrown into prison and attainted with other Lancastrians.

He was, however, subsequently pardoned by Edward IV.

Sir John, who was a man of great learning and a sound lawyer, wrote
many valuable legal works. One of these, entitled, "The Difference
between an Absolute and a Limited Monarchy as it more particularly
regards the English Constitution," has passed through many editions.

The last of these editions, with amendments, was published as late as
1719.

Another of Sir John's works is "A Commentary on the Politic Laws of
England."

He also wrote many other works, some of which are still in manuscript.
It is in these papers that he describes the customs and practices of
the Inns of Court.




STEPHEN GARDINER.


Stephen Gardiner, Bishop of Winchester and Chancellor of England in the
sixteenth century, was an able lawyer, a learned divine, and a shrewd
statesman.

Few men have risen higher by mere force of ability, few men have
suffered greater changes of fortune, few have been more magnified and
commended, and few more insidiously disparaged and outrageously treated
than this famous Prelate, not only during his lifetime, but also after
his decease.

The accounts given of him by contemporary historians are so confused
and contradictory, that it is difficult to arrive at any just
conclusion with regard either to Gardiner's character and disposition,
or to fathom his motives as a churchman, or his measures as a statesman.

Some writers, amongst others, Hall and Fox, describe him as a very
"devil incarnate," of a most fierce and sanguinary disposition,
delighting in bloodshed. They declare also that he was the principal
inciter to all the cruelties practised during the reign of Queen Mary.

Others again, according to Pitt and Persons, assert that the Bishop of
Winchester was a very "angel of light," being of a singularly mild and
compassionate nature, and so tender was his heart that it was through
his influence and exertions that so many Protestants escaped death.

All agree, however, that this celebrated man had great abilities, much
learning, and also an amount of general knowledge considerably in
advance of the age. He had, however, many failings, and some vices,
and either the natural bent of his mind, or the dangerous condition of
his position, induced him to adopt a policy so tortuous, that even now
it is difficult to trace the motives of some of the wisest and best,
as well as those of some of his most injudicious and apparently cruel
actions.

He was born at Bury St. Edmund's, Suffolk, but the year of his birth
as well as his parentage he ever held secret. Some believe his parents
were very obscure persons; but Dugdale, a great authority in such
matters, asserts that he was the illegitimate son of a prelate nobly
descended and royally allied--namely, of Dr. Lionel Woodville, Bishop
of Salisbury, and brother of Queen Elizabeth Woodville, consort of King
Edward IV. Certain it is that for many years neither he nor his brother
bishop, Bonner, born under the same circumstances, ever used the
surnames by which they were afterwards known. One called himself Dr.
Stephens, the other Dr. Edmunds, until Gardiner, on obtaining place,
assumed the surname he has made so celebrated.

At Trinity Hall, Cambridge, where he completed his education, Gardiner
was early distinguished for his talents and his quick parts, especially
for his extraordinary skill in Greek, and for the grace with which he
spoke and wrote Latin. In process of time he applied himself to the
study of Civil and Common Law, and his reputation both as a scholar and
a lawyer speedily made him known to some of the famous men of that age.

He was first taken under the protection of a generous and powerful
patron, Thomas, Duke of Norfolk, but soon afterwards was brought to the
notice, and then received into the household of Cardinal Wolsey, as
secretary to that great statesman, then in the zenith of his power. He
was thus early initiated into the skilful yet dread policy that for so
long a period made the powerful Cardinal the _de facto_ ruler of this
country.

A mere accident gained for Gardiner the favour of the King. Wolsey and
the Emperor of Austria had been at one time such intimate friends that
the latter, when writing (which he did frequently) to the Cardinal,
always signed his letters with his own hand, subscribing himself, "Your
son and cousin, Charles."

After the battle of Pavia, when the French King was taken prisoner,
Wolsey unexpectedly changed sides, and from being a friend of the
Emperor's, became a strong partisan of France's. This sudden change
of sentiment may possibly have arisen from compassion, but Guiscard
suggests another and less worthy motive.

Some months previously, and for some unexplained reason, the Emperor
had ceased to write personally to the Cardinal, and only communicated
with him through his secretary in the same manner as he did with other
persons. According to Guiscard, Wolsey deeply resented this change and
lapse of friendship, hence, therefore, his animosity.

Soon after the battle of Pavia, the Cardinal projected a treaty which
was to change the aspect of affairs in all civilised Europe, which,
indeed, it did. While this treaty was in progress, the King, coming
unexpectedly to More Park, in Hertfordshire, found Gardiner busily
employed in framing several of the important articles.

Few princes understood business or could transact it better than Henry;
he rapidly, therefore, formed a favourable estimate of Gardiner's
abilities. Not only did he appreciate the secretary's talents, but
he was also pleased by his manner and conversation, and, above all,
admired the fertility of invention of which Gardiner had already given
convincing proofs. In short, Gardiner was the very man of whom the
King at that moment had especial need.

Henry was bent upon obtaining his divorce from Queen Katherine; but
though he had obtained many fair promises from Rome, he had failed
to induce the then Pontiff, Clement II., to _do_ anything towards
advancing his suit. It was in the highest degree expedient, therefore,
to send a delegate to Rome who was not only a wary diplomatist, but
also a shrewd and skilful lawyer; above all, he must be one in whom the
King could fully confide. In Gardiner were found all these essential
qualifications, and the King did not hesitate to inform the Cardinal of
the favourable impression his secretary had made.

With all his faults, there was nothing mean in the character of Wolsey.
He was truly great in this particular, that he feared no man's rise,
and grudged to none the reward due to talent. Though overbearing in
temper, haughty in manner, tyrannical and revengeful in action, it was
yet this noble quality that so strongly attached his adherents to him.

Far from viewing with displeasure the favourable impression made upon
the King, he aided his secretary's interests with all his powerful
influence; and in February, 1528, Gardiner, together with Dr. Fox,
Provost of King's College, Cambridge, left England on a special mission
to Rome.

It is evident, from many documents still extant, that the entire
confidence, both of the King and of his Minister, had been reposed in
Gardiner.

Respecting his conduct in Rome, historians are again at variance as to
his motives; but all agree in praising his talents, his dexterity, and
his diligence.

Some writers assert that he honestly endeavoured to carry out the
King's and the Cardinal's wishes; others, on the contrary, maintain
that, in order to secure his own advancement, he betrayed the Cardinal
in this embassy, and that for this end he urged forward with the
greatest eagerness proceedings which he knew his master in his heart
desired might be spun out as lengthily as possible.

However, it must be admitted that such statements are barely compatible
with the affection which Wolsey ever entertained for his secretary.

When writing to Gardiner, the Cardinal calls him "the half of himself,
than whom none was dearer to him;" and in recommending him to the Pope,
he says, when His Holiness hears him speak, it will be as if he heard
the Cardinal himself.

At any rate Gardiner spoke boldly at Rome. His diligence and activity
also were so great, that between the conflicting interests and
exertions of the various Courts of England, France, Spain, and Austria,
the unfortunate Pontiff was so pressed and harassed that he fell
dangerously ill.

The perplexities of his mind seriously increasing the sufferings of
his body, for some time he was like to die, a contingency that offered
fresh occasion for the intrigues that were so rife at that period.

Had the Pope died, every effort would have been made to procure for
Wolsey the suffrages of the Conclave; and at one time there appeared
every probability that he would have succeeded to the Pontifical
throne, but Clement recovered, and matters returned to their normal
condition.

No sooner did the Pope's health enable him to transact business, than
the matter of the English commission was again pressed forward. An
extraordinary amount of care and skill were now required, not only to
obtain the Pontiff's consent, but to pen the commission in such terms
as would satisfy Henry, and dispose the Cardinal Legate Campegio to
come to England with a good disposition towards the affair.

At length the important papers were obtained, and Fox at once
forwarded them to the King.

The joy with which they were received by Henry, the Cardinal, and Anne
Boleyn, was exceedingly great, and their satisfaction was expressed,
not only by letters, but also by the valuable presents they made to the
successful delegates.

To Gardiner, however, were allotted the greatest honours, for though
Fox had nominally been the leading personage of the mission, yet
Gardiner had in fact taken the chief part throughout the negotiations;
and so impressed was Henry by the talents evinced by his clever agent,
that the latter was speedily recalled from Rome, in order to be
entrusted with the management of the case before the Legatine Court.

Indeed, so great at this time was the Secretary's influence, that
without his advice the King was unwilling to commence his suit. No
sooner had Gardiner arrived in England than he was made Archdeacon of
Norwich, and soon after, the King took him from Wolsey's service and
made him Secretary of State.

The suit had now begun; but whether Wolsey secretly sided with Rome in
this matter, or whether he was only suspected by Henry of so doing, the
King ere long became furious with his Minister on account of the delays
that were for ever occurring to hinder the progress of the divorce.

The Pope's behaviour added much to the difficulties into which he was
thrown; and believing that the Cardinal, while apparently aiding, was
in reality fomenting the troubles by which he was beset, the King felt
convinced that either he was being duped by his Minister, or that his
Minister was allowing himself to be egregiously duped by the Court of
Rome. In either case, Henry determined to trust Wolsey no longer, and
only waited a favourable opportunity to effect his fall.

This opportunity soon presented itself. The successor who was needed
was at hand, and again an accident furnished the King with the adviser
that he so urgently required.

Dr. Cranmer, a tutor in the family of one Mr. Cressy, of Waltham Cross,
was with his pupils at their father's house at Waltham, when the King
with his Court passed a night there during one of the Royal progresses.

Drs. Gardiner and Fox were in attendance on His Majesty, and Cranmer
had supper with them.

Men's minds were so occupied with the Royal divorce that little
else was ever talked of; and the two courtiers, being already well
acquainted with the great reputation for learning and solid judgment
that Cranmer had gained for himself at Cambridge, sought to obtain his
opinion on the matter.

Cranmer modestly declined to give an "opinion," but said that in his
poor judgment it appeared to him that, if the marriage were unlawful,
it was so by Divine precept; and if that were the case, then the Pope's
dispensation could be of no effect either to confirm or annul it, for
even the Pope could not make lawful that which God had declared to be
unlawful. Instead, therefore, of continuing these long and fruitless
negotiations with Rome, it might be better to consult all the learned
men, or, indeed, all the Universities of Christendom, and then,
according to their finding, the Pope must needs give judgment.

So much impressed were Gardiner and Fox by this advice, that the next
day they laid the substance of it before the King.

Some writers say that Gardiner wished to make it appear that the
opinion came from him, but that Fox, either from generosity to Cranmer
or from spite to Gardiner, took care to mention from whence it was
derived.

At any rate, these observations of Cranmer's caused him to be presented
to the King, as Henry had at once perceived the importance of the
suggestion thus thrown out.

Brilliant talents and an admirable judgment commanded respect, while
the candour and uprightness of Cranmer's character secured for him the
esteem of all who knew him. His rise in the King's favour was rapid,
and honours were showered upon him.

In after times Henry might differ from his Minister, but he knew he
need never distrust him. The King often said that the Archbishop of
Canterbury (Cranmer) was the only Churchman he had ever known upon whom
he could implicitly rely.

Unhappily, the haughty and hasty monarch occasionally succeeded in
prevailing upon Cranmer to swerve from the strict line of wisdom and
prudence to which his opinions inclined him, but although he yielded
in action, the purity of his intentions and the honesty of his purpose
were never doubted.

The new adviser's rapid advancement was the signal of Wolsey's fall.

While that powerful Minister was apparently enjoying the plenitude of
his greatness, and triumphing in the magnificence of his position,
destruction came upon him unawares. Great and brilliant had been his
rise, equally great and fatal was his fall.

No sooner was his disgrace resolved upon than the Great Seal was taken
from him, his vast possessions were confiscated, he was banished to
his house at Asher, and informations were filed against him by the
Attorney-General.

Such a tempest of misfortunes broke at once over the head of the
unhappy man that his calamities seemed without end, and the ruin of his
fortunes was speedily followed by the destruction of his health.

When great men fall, their pseudo friends of prosperous days fall away
also. Such friendship but blossoms in the sunshine, it ever withers and
dies when clouds obscure their sun.

In this time of cruel adversity, but very few of his many followers
remained faithful to the once mighty Cardinal. Of these few the chief
was his secretary, Thomas Cromwell, who proved his fidelity not only by
his steady adherence to his master, but also by stoutly soliciting the
Court in his favour.

As Cromwell's rank did not entitle him to admittance to the King's
presence, he was compelled to have recourse to one of the Secretaries
of State.

It was to Gardiner that he addressed himself, and it is to that
Minister's credit that although, on account of Henry's hasty and
tyrannical temper, the task involved considerable risk, the quondam
secretary did not desert his old patron and master, but interceded for
him with skill, if without much heartiness.

The unhappy Cardinal's letters at this time are most dismal. In one
of them, to Thomas Cromwell, he says he has written it "with his rude
hand and sorrowful heart," and he signs himself, "T. Carlis. Ebor
misserrimus" (the most miserable Thomas, Cardinal of York).

Gardiner at this time was devoting himself to the difficult task of
obtaining from the Heads of the Colleges and from the learned men
belonging to the University of Cambridge, their declaration in the
King's cause, a business that required no small amount of dexterity and
artifice.

His efforts were successful. So brilliant an exploit must needs be
rewarded, and his rise in the Church was rapid. In the spring of 1531,
he was made Archdeacon of Leicester, and in November of the same year
he was installed Bishop of Winchester.

"I have often squared" (meaning passed over) "with you, Gardiner," said
the King, when he gave his Minister this valuable preferment, "but I
love you never the worse, as the Bishoprick I now give will convince
you."

The newly-made Bishop sat with Dr. Cranmer, then Archbishop of
Canterbury, when that prelate declared Queen Katherine's marriage with
the King to be null and void, May 23rd, 1533. He was then sent to
Marseilles to intimate to the Pope and the French King, that in case
difficulties should be made respecting the divorce, the King of England
would appeal to a General Council.

On his return home he was called upon, together with all the other
Bishops, to acknowledge Henry as Supreme Head of the Church; and
his pen was henceforth constantly employed in vindicating Henry's
proceedings, both respecting that monarch's divorce and subsequent
marriage, and also with regard to his having thrown off the dominion
of the See of Rome.

Gardiner's writings on these difficult subjects obtained for him at the
time the highest reputation.

During this period of religious agitation, a strange spirit prevailed
amongst all classes of people, of whatever denomination of religion
they might be.

Though all needed tolerance, none would grant it. On the contrary,
intolerance and bigotry seemed to rule every man's heart. Even those
who, whilst they were themselves undergoing its sufferings, had groaned
the loudest under persecution, were, when relieved, equally loud in
their opposition to the smallest indulgence being extended to those who
differed from them in opinion.

Whichever might be the party in the ascendant, its leaders were urged
on to institute persecutions and trials, and to enforce executions
whenever a doctrine was started to which they did not agree.

Some writers assert that Gardiner was vindictive and cruel; others,
that he was forced tacitly to permit proceedings of which he
disapproved, and of which he would willingly have mitigated the
severity.

Others again say that the King's love of power, and his desire to
show himself as a true son of the Church, although he had assumed her
temporal headship, induced him to bear witness to his faith by severe
measures, whenever her authority in doctrines was impugned by his
subjects.

Certain it is, that now began a series of religious persecutions that
cast shame and disgrace upon all who professed the name of Christ.

His holy Church on earth, far from being a tender mother to poor,
suffering, and ignorant mortals, became a by-word for cruelty and
bigotry, a very Moloch, who desired the sacrifice of her children both
by fire and by the sword.

What can men deem are the chief attributes of the Almighty, that to
give Him pleasure it is necessary to torture and put to death the
children that His dear Son came to save?

It is sickening to read the list of those who suffered for religion's
sake during the latter part of Henry's reign, and during the whole of
the reign of his daughter, Queen Mary.

A Frenchman writing at this time from England, tells his friend in
Latin:

"They have a strange way of managing in England, for those who are for
the Pope are hanged, and those who are against him are burnt."

Henry also each year became more tyrannical and overbearing. He brooked
neither opposition nor contradiction. His humours were so capricious
that even his Ministers were constantly in personal danger, it being
impossible to foresee how much involved the King might choose to
consider them in the schisms that were being brought to the Royal
notice.

Gardiner was certainly once in very considerable peril.

His young kinsman and secretary, Germain Gardiner, having been
suspected of denying the King's supremacy, had been tried, condemned,
and executed, and Gardiner's enemies sought to implicate the Bishop in
his secretary's treasonable opinions.

Those who view Gardiner's character mercifully, urge that in order to
secure his own safety and that of his relatives, he was driven into
assenting rather than being a party to the numerous cruel executions
that now sullied the history of this country.

Gardiner ultimately lost the King's favour, from having drawn up a
paper of articles against Queen Katherine Parr.

It appears that, as usual, Henry had conceived some jealous suspicions
of his Queen, and had directed the Bishop of Winchester to prepare
these statements against her.

This important document having been confided to Chancellor Wriothesley,
in order that the Queen should be committed to the Tower, he by
accident or design let it drop from his bosom. It was picked up by a
friendly hand, and immediately conveyed to the Princess.

Katherine so wrought upon the King's affection, that she not only
succeeded in allaying his jealous fears and quieting his suspicions,
but she also so excited his resentment against the writer of the
accusations against her, that from that day Henry would never again see
Gardiner.

It is also believed that this incident was the cause of the Bishop's
name not being included in the list of the King's executors.

At one time, so high did Gardiner stand in the King's estimation, that
Henry had resolved not only to nominate him as an executor, but also
to direct that he should be a member of the Council to whom would be
entrusted the executive power during the minority of his son.

Here again, however, is difference of opinion amongst historians, some
writers asserting that it was not the animosity of Queen Katherine
Parr, but the friendship of the Duke of Norfolk and his family, that
proved the ruin of Gardiner's fortunes at this period.

Henry having become jealous of that powerful noble, seized upon every
opportunity of humbling his relatives and friends.

But this, as well as most of the events of Gardiner's life, have been
related by contemporary writers with such violence of partisanship,
that it is difficult to ascertain the truth.

To Gardiner, however, must be assigned the merit that both during the
life, and after the death of the King his master, he ever spoke and
wrote of him in terms of much deference and respect.

Upon the accession of Edward VI. Archbishop Cranmer laboured earnestly
to establish the great work of the Reformation on a firm basis, and was
very desirous to obtain Gardiner's assistance, or, at any rate, his
concurrence in his plans.

But this wily prelate would neither concur nor disagree with Cranmer's
schemes. His ruling maxim had ever been to keep things quiet, and he
asserted that this could not be done were any great alterations made
either in Church or State.

He agreed in the wisdom with which the Archbishop sought to establish
the Reformed religion, and also in his desire to do away with
superstitious practices, but he saw grave objections to the innovation
being attempted at present.

The King's youth and feeble health, the necessary absence of the
Protector Somerset, who was detained in Scotland by military duty,
made the future not only doubtful, but gloomy; and Gardiner was of
opinion that it would be injudicious to disturb the present Church
government.

However, Cranmer carried his point in so far as having a Royal
Commission appointed for the purpose of visiting each diocese.

The Bishop of Winchester, notwithstanding his love of peace, opposed
this measure, and refused to allow the Commissioners to enter his
diocese. For this contumacy he was committed to the Fleet Prison.

His imprisonment there was not severe, the Warden of the Fleet being
his friend, neither did it last long, and when released he returned to
his diocese, and addressed himself zealously but quietly to his duties
there.

This calm, however, was not of long duration, for within the year he
was summoned to preach in London on St. Peter Day, and his doctrines
so offended the Council that he was sent to the Tower where he remained
a prisoner during the remainder of Edward's reign.

After Edward's death, Somerset visited Gardiner in prison with a view
of effecting his release.

Gardiner readily expressed his approval of all that had been done to
establish the Reformed religion, and promised for the future obedience
to Royal authority, but he would not acknowledge that he had been
guilty of contumacy in the past. On this point he was immovable,
protesting that he was innocent in every respect.

He was brought before the Privy Council, and then three months were
given to him for reflection.

When this period had expired, as the Bishop remained in the same
sentiments, it was resolved to proceed judicially against him in order
to deprive him of the See of Winchester.

He then refused to sign the articles that had been sent him previously,
and to which he had in a measure assented, and he vehemently demanded
to be tried as to the grounds of his imprisonment.

But the Privy Council refused his prayer, and his bishopric was
sequestrated.

All these proceedings were much censured as being contrary to the
liberties of Englishmen, and contrary also to all forms of legal
procedure. It was thought very hard that a man should be put in prison
solely from a complaint having been made against him, and still more
hard that after two years' durance, and without further inquiry,
articles should be put to him for his signature.

Such actions were quite indefensible upon any constitutional principles.

Archbishop Cranmer greatly deprecated this illegal harshness, for he
foresaw the injurious consequences.

Such ill-timed severity would inevitably drive men like Gardiner,
Tonstall, and Day, who had already acknowledged the King's supremacy,
back to the Church of Rome, and the progress of the Reformation must
thereby be sorely hindered.

And so it proved.

During the few remaining years of Edward's life, Gardiner remained
in the Tower, a prisoner, and yet not strictly kept, for during this
period he wrote many controversial pieces, and several Latin poems,
besides putting into verse some of the most beautiful and poetical
passages in the books of Ecclesiastes, Wisdom, and Job.

On the 3rd August, 1553, Queen Mary made her solemn entry into the
Tower, when Bishop Gardiner, for himself, and also in the name of his
fellow prisoners, the Duke of Norfolk, the Duchess of Somerset, Lord
Courtney, and others of high rank, delivered a congratulatory speech to
Her Majesty, who at its conclusion gave them their liberty.

On August 8th, he, with Archbishop Cranmer, and in the presence of the
Queen, performed the obsequies of the late King Edward VI. The young
monarch was buried in Westminster Abbey, and the ceremonial was the
English funeral service.

The next day Bishop Gardiner again took possession of Winchester House,
Southwark, after an imprisonment of rather more than five years. On the
23rd, he was declared Chancellor of England.

On the 1st October he had the honour of crowning the Queen, and on the
5th of the same month he opened the first Parliament of her reign.

He was also again restored to his academical honours, and was
re-elected Master of Trinity Hall.

Not only were distinctions and emoluments thus showered upon him, but
the esteem that the Queen manifestly had for him, and the confidence
she reposed in him, led to his being speedily endowed with an unusually
large share of civil as well as ecclesiastical power.

Mary was exceedingly anxious on three points.

The first was to substantiate the legitimacy of her birth by annulling
her mother's divorce; the second was to effect the restoration of the
old religion in England, and to reconcile this country to Rome; and
thirdly, she eagerly desired to obtain the consent of Parliament to her
marriage with Prince Philip of Spain.

In all these difficult and important matters Bishop Gardiner aided her
with marvellous sagacity and unflagging zeal.

Thus it came to pass that the same man who procured the divorce for
the father, obtained for the daughter the reversal of that divorce.

Now it was, in these days of triumph and success, that Gardiner gave
evidence of his ambition, and of his time-serving nature. To preserve
his ascendency over a weak and obstinate woman, he allowed himself
to yield many points of which he disapproved, and then, having begun
to swim with the stream, he found himself compelled to go faster and
farther than he had intended.

The Spanish match was as distasteful to him as it was to the bulk of
the nation, foreseeing, as he did, that it would involve this country
in great expense, and that it would not tend to increase either the
happiness or the good disposition of the Queen.

Unhappily, Mary had inherited obstinacy and violence of temper from
her father, and a jealous and melancholy temperament from her ill-used
mother.

All the early years of her life had been overshadowed by misfortune
and insult, and she had been taught to believe that her sorrows mostly
arose from the sinfulness of the nation in resisting the authority of
the Church to which she belonged.

Unattractive in mind as well as in person, she loved a man who cared
but little, if at all, for her, who had only consented to the marriage
from motives of policy, and whose morose and sullen manners embittered
the rare visits he accorded to his wife.

However great were Gardiner's errors, not only as a religious bigot,
but as an unscrupulous and ambitious statesman, it must be remembered
to his credit, that he was ever zealous in preserving what he deemed
the constitution of his country, especially so in guarding her from the
encroachments of foreigners.

To preserve his own power, he yielded against his judgment to the
Queen's desire for her marriage with Philip of Spain, but in drawing
up the articles of the marriage contract he took care so to frame them,
that they would not only be passed easily by the English Parliament,
but also that the Spaniards should be entirely excluded from any share
in the Government of England.

To Philip was granted the "Title" of King of England, and his likeness
was to be united to that of the Queen upon every coin and seal, but
Mary's signature alone sufficed to give authority to all deeds and acts.

No Spaniard could hold office in this country.

The Queen could not be obliged to leave England, nor any child, should
there be children, without the consent of Parliament.

The Queen was to have a jointure of £40,000 a year from Spain, and
£20,000 from the Netherlands. Should the Queen have only daughters,
they were to succeed to her throne, and have from Spain the usual
portions of kings' daughters.

Should Philip survive the Queen, he was to have no share in the English
Government.

Such stringent conditions appeared very disadvantageous to Spain; but
so great was Philip's desire to obtain a foothold in England, that
he yielded every point, believing, probably, that when once firmly
established in this country, his own influence, combined with the power
of the Church of Rome, would overcome much opposition and enable him to
gain important concessions.

Parliament passed the Bill, and all obstacles to the marriage being now
removed, King Philip, attended and accompanied by a magnificent suite
of nobles, and escorted by a large fleet, put to sea, and arrived at
Southampton at the end of July, 1554.

From thence he proceeded to the Palace at Winchester, where he was
magnificently entertained by the Bishop. The following day he was
solemnly married to the Queen by that prelate in the Cathedral of
Winchester.

The newly-married pair made their entry into London with every
circumstance of pomp and splendour.

At Windsor the King was installed a Knight of the Garter, and whenever
he and the Queen appeared in public they were received by the people
with universal acclamation.

But this pleasant and joyful state of things was not to be of long
duration.

Philip speedily gave evidence of the distaste he felt for his bride,
who, poor woman, had not only the misfortune of having an unlovely
and unlovable countenance, but was also afflicted with a peevish and
jealous temper. She was well aware how little attractive she was, and
therefore suspected and disliked every woman who approached her. Her
half-sister and heir, Elizabeth, was especially the object of her
jealous fears.

This Princess, however, behaved with so much prudence and fortitude
that she gave no loophole for the attacks of her enemies. Still,
despite her care and prudence, and through the machinations of Gardiner
and Cardinal Pole, she was sent to the Tower; but she was saved from
perhaps a worse fate by her brother-in-law, Philip of Spain, who
interceded in her behalf.

There is much reason to believe that of the two Philip much preferred
the younger sister, and as Queen Mary was in bad health and her life
most precarious, he hoped to marry Elizabeth after his wife's death.

The unhappy Queen, in the bitter disappointment occasioned by her
marriage, again turned to her Church for consolation, and in spite of
the King's and the Chancellor's opposition, insisted upon Cardinal
Pole's coming to England, armed with a license under the Queen's Great
Seal to exercise his functions as the Pope's Legate.

Soon after Pole's arrival, the Houses of Lords and Commons presented a
petition to the King and Queen, praying that the nation might again be
received into the bosom of the Catholic Church.

The Cardinal, after a lengthy oration, granted the petition, absolving
the people of England, and declaring them reconciled to the See of Rome.

But the joy attendant on this proclamation was speedily troubled by
the revival of the sanguinary laws for the repression of what was now
called heresy.

These laws were speedily carried into execution with much rigour, and a
bloody persecution was set on foot in almost all parts of the kingdom.

Whether this persecution was actively concurred in, or only passively
submitted to by the Bishop of Winchester, is a matter of doubt. On one
side he ever showed himself of the popular opinion by siding with
Cardinal Pole when they sat together on various commissions. On the
other hand, he saved the lives of many Protestants by merely locking
them up until quieter and more peaceable days should come.

These were indeed dismal and dreadful times. A frightful religious zeal
prevailed in the minds of men, inducing them, under colour of promoting
the Gospel, to act precisely contrary to its spirit.

Gardiner, no doubt, had his share, and a large one, in these barbarous
proceedings; but the whole reproach of these savage cruelties must not
rest upon his memory.

It is certain that when there were hopes of an heir to the throne, the
Chancellor induced the Queen to restore several prisoners to liberty.
He went in person to the Tower on January 18th, 1555, and released the
Archbishop of York, Sir Edward Rogers, Sir James Crofts, Sir Nicholas
Throckmorton, Sir Edward Warner, Sir George Harper, Sir William
Saintlow, Sir Gawin Carew, Sir Andrew Dudley, William Gibs, Cuthbert
Vaughan, John Harrington, John Tremain, and others of less note.

It must not be forgotten, also, that during Mary's second Parliament,
far from advocating the stringent laws that were in course of
preparation against heretics, as persons of the Reformed religion were
now called, he endeavoured to mitigate their severity; but in this, as
in other matters, he was borne on by the stream of Royal and popular
opinion, and, perhaps, compelled to acquiesce in proceedings of which
he disapproved.

Thus Henry's severities and injustice were now emulated and surpassed
by Mary's severities and cruelty.

If Gardiner disapproved in his heart of the persecution of heretics,
his clemency or merciful inclinations did but little or nothing towards
diminishing the frightful number of blazing piles that day by day
consumed the bodies of miserable victims of religious fury.

Tortured by jealous love, unblessed with children, the unhappy
Mary turned with increased fervour to religion as her only solace.
Convinced, as she was, that the Church alone could afford relief to her
sorrows, the bigotry of her nature and education demanded the holocaust
of thousands of victims to appease the anger of an offended Deity.

Violent and obstinate, her Ministers, even had they wished to oppose
her, could not, without peril to themselves, have resisted her stubborn
resolution to have her way.

Unhappily then for England, her Ministers were both yielding and
unscrupulous.

Not only was the Queen relentless in her resolve to exterminate heresy,
but if the Bishop of Winchester relaxed in zeal, Bishop Bonner, and
William, Marquis of Winchester (who for a time held the Great Seal),
were eager to show their love for their Church by the torture they
inflicted on her enemies.

Gardiner, whatever may have been his personal wishes, also yielded to
the pressure put upon him; and by his dexterity and brilliant talents
made himself of inestimable value to the Queen, and by so doing
secured for himself supremacy in the Council, and also kept away other
pretendants, especially Cardinal Pole, who was a formidable rival.

But if, as the writers who view him favourably assert, the Bishop of
Winchester was thus impelled by the temper of his Royal mistress,
and by a series of circumstances beyond his control, to acquiesce in
actions of which he disapproved, what must be thought of the conscience
of a man, who as statesman and Churchman permitted tortures to be
inflicted, and executions to take place, that have made the reign of
Mary a by-word of bloodshed and cruelty, and have covered the memories
of this monarch and her Ministers with indelible disgrace?

The land was deluged in blood. The smoke of burning human beings
darkened the air, as it rose in hideous sacrifice to the Almighty
Father, and the shrieks of tortured victims, the prayers of martyrs
at the stake, ascended daily to heaven in one great agonised cry for
mercy--and for vengeance.

For a time England seemed as one stunned by the frequency of such
unusual and horrible spectacles, but by degrees the mighty spirit of
the nation was roused.

Laymen and Churchmen alike shook off their lethargy. The degrading
cruelties of the reign of Catholic Mary placed Protestant Elizabeth
more firmly on the throne; and when James II. struggled vainly to
restore his Church to England, it was doubtless the remembrance of
such scenes that induced many staunch Englishmen to welcome with
enthusiasm the advent of the foreign Prince of Orange, and his English
wife.

Fox, who describes Gardiner as a monster delighting in torture and
blood, declares that the Bishop was stricken down by dreadful and
deadly disease, the very day on which he had consigned Bishops Latimer
and Ridley to the flames at Oxford.

This historian relates that the Duke of Norfolk came to sup at
Winchester House, but that Gardiner would not sit down at table until
the messenger from Oxford had arrived to say the sacrifice of the
martyrs had been consummated.

As he joyed over the narrative of their sufferings, the hand of Heaven
fell heavily upon him, and he died soon afterwards in inexpressible
anguish of body and mind.

Other biographers say but little of the malady to which he succumbed,
but Fox's account is clearly incorrect in many particulars. The
Duke of Norfolk Fox alludes to, had been dead some thirteen months,
and Gardiner made a speech in Parliament more than a week after the
execution of these Bishops.

It is also a disputed point whether Gardiner really exhibited
vindictive eagerness in bringing about the deaths of Latimer and
Ridley, or whether, as some say, he endeavoured to save them, straining
indeed his authority by offering Latimer a pardon without the knowledge
of the Queen or the Council.

Bell, as well as Fox, declares that his death was a judgment brought
on him for his cruelty to these martyrs, but Dr. Godwin, Bishop of
Hereford, Dr. Fuller, and Archbishop Parker, all ascribe his death to
natural causes.

For some years Gardiner had suffered from rheumatic gout, and
ultimately consumption of the lungs was joined to his other diseases.

Whatever may have been his bodily ailments, it is agreed by every
writer that his latter days were embittered by remorse and mental
distress. The consciousness of his many sins of omission and commission
pressed heavily on his mind. He constantly averred that having been
endowed with much power, he felt that he had turned that power to evil
rather than to good.

Some historians suggest that he repented having returned to the Church
of Rome. Be this as it may, his opinions respecting the two Churches
were such as to-day would be denominated broad.

His sermons were very remarkable, for eloquence, for talent, and
also for a peculiar sophistry of argument, by which he could twist
every quotation or opinion so as to suit the views he at the moment
entertained.

His manner was earnest and noble, his voice impressive, and few could
listen unmoved to the fervid accents, and to the brilliant and crafty
reasoning by which he advocated the various points of his discourse.

It is evident, by the attachment that was felt for him for upwards of
forty years, by some of the greatest statesmen in Europe, that he had
the talent of conciliating men's minds and commanding their respect;
and in his own diocese he was not only a wise and considerate Bishop,
but he was infinitely loved and admired.

He died in Winchester House, London, but he was buried in Winchester
Cathedral, close by the high altar.

The funeral was solemnised by an amount of pomp and magnificence rare
even in those days, when much outward show was usual in every ceremony.

To conduct the unconscious dead to their last resting-place with
every circumstance of lugubrious state and grandeur, was then deemed
but fitting expressions of affection and respect on the part of the
relatives and mourners.

Amongst the many cruel actions of which the odium has been cast upon
Gardiner is the mournful tragedy of Lady Jane Grey. This poor girl was
a victim to the political intrigues of an unscrupulous and ambitious
party, and she paid by the sacrifice of her life, and that of her
husband, Lord Guilford Dudley, for her brief and unwilling reign.

Sir Thomas Wyatt and Sir Peter Carew were the originators of a
deep-laid and formidable plot, by which Mary and her sister were to be
deprived of their rights of inheritance. They flattered the ambition
of the Duke of Suffolk by suggesting that his daughter-in-law should
ascend the throne, and thereby succeeded in implicating him and
his children so completely in their projects that the heads of all
ultimately fell upon the scaffold.

The alarm occasioned to the Queen and her adherents by the discovery of
this plot was, no doubt, considerable; but against Gardiner is brought
the grave charge of having fomented this panic, rather than having
endeavoured to allay it.

But for his influence, the deaths of the principal conspirators, Wyatt
and Carew, would have sufficed, and have been deemed a sufficient
sacrifice. Many others amongst those who suffered in connection with
the attempt might have been spared; but the Bishop is reported to have
said:

"We may shake off the leaves and lop the branches, but if we do not
utterly destroy the root, the hope of hereticks, we do nothing."




THE CHAPEL.


Amongst the many nooks and corners of this ancient Inn of Gray's, the
little chapel must not be forgotten. Within its tranquil precincts all
things speak of the past, for little has been changed therein for many
generations.

Small and unpretentious as it is, few can enter this tiny place
of worship without experiencing some emotion, without giving some
thought to the many great and illustrious men--lawyers, Churchmen, and
statesmen, now long numbered with the dead--who have knelt here for
prayer and praise.

Centuries have elapsed since they have passed away, but their noble
deeds and writings are still remembered and cherished.

Happily for England, this great race is not extinct. Some of those
who now assemble within these walls have already made for themselves
illustrious names--names that will be honoured and revered when they,
in the fulness of time, depart; but others come here in sorrow, and
perchance remorse, for many a promising but wasted life.

Poor, feeble mortals that we are! How many of us live but to exist; and
often, indeed, that existence is but the puerile flutter of a day!

Truly, we are but as the sand upon the sea-shore. The tiny atoms shine,
perhaps brilliantly, while the sun looks down upon them; but when
clouds darken the sky, their brightness fades and soon is gone. Then
a little later comes the rising tide--that overwhelming tide of Time,
that sweeps them rapidly away. They are gone, and the place where they
dwelt, and perchance glittered, knows them no more. No one asks for
them; no one misses them. The sand is again as smooth as when they were
there. The atoms around still quiver and shimmer in the sunshine as
those now departed did of yore.

Not only from association with the past is the quiet little chapel
attractive, but there is something soothing in its very aspect.

The fact that so little change has been made in the building or its
arrangements for some hundred years is interesting, and it is touching
to see the number of gray-headed men who usually attend the services.
The memorials around also speak of those who are gone--the painted
glass windows, the decorations, the richly-carved book of the Communion
Service, are all gifts from those who dearly loved the old place.

In these days of greatly increased form, it is rare also to find a
preacher who appears in the pulpit arrayed in the old black Geneva
gown.

This quaintly-fashioned gown is precisely that to which our Puritan
forefathers attached so much importance, deeming that it savoured less
of Popery than any other raiment, inasmuch as its severe simplicity
was as far removed as possible from the more imposing and, in their
opinion, gaudy vestments of Rome.

From the pulpit in Gray's Inn Chapel may be heard sermons that stir
men's hearts, that enlighten men's minds.

No man can hope to obtain the post of preacher to Gray's Inn, unless
he possesses talents that entitle him to be listened to with respect
and interest. Therefore, though quiet, though old-fashioned, though
unemotional in ceremonies, many who think deeply, and who wish to
listen to the words of those who also think deeply, may be found
amongst the congregation gathered together in Gray's Inn Chapel.

The present little building stands upon the site of the ancient chapel
that received its Royal license from Edward II. in 1314, when John, the
son of Reginald de Grey, was authorised to convey thirty acres of land,
two acres of meadow, and ten shillings rent, with the appurtenances,
in Kentish Town, and in the parish of St. Andrew's, Holborn, to the
Prior and Convent of St. Bartholomew's, in Smithfield, and to their
successors, to provide a chaplain to perform divine service daily for
the repose of the soul of the said John, and for the repose of the
souls of his ancestors for ever.

The Prior of St. Bartholomew's, however, instead of providing a
chaplain for the service of the chapel, appears, according to the
accounts of the rents and payments of that monastery, to have paid the
Society of Gray's Inn an annual sum of £7 13s. 4d.

When the monasteries were dissolved, Henry VIII. decreed that the
Treasurer and Fellows of this same Society should receive yearly
from the King's Highness, during the King's pleasure, the sum of £6
13s. 4d., to be paid in even portions, namely, at the "Feasts of The
Natyvytie of Our Lord God, of the Annunciation of Our Blessed Ladye,
the Vyrgyne, of the Natyvytie of Seynt John Baptist, and of Seynt
Michaell, the Archaungell."

But in 1651, during the time of the Commonwealth, this payment ceased,
and has never been revived, though during the reign of Elizabeth the
officiating minister received a salary of £4 a year.

By an order of Pension, 15th November, 1598, it was ordered that the
"Reader in Divinity" to be chosen, shall be a man unmarried, having
no ecclesiastical living other than a Prebend, that he be without the
care of souls, and that he shall keep the same place while he continues
unmarried.

This order corresponds with an usage formerly existing with regard to
the vergers of St. Paul's Cathedral, who, by one of the Cathedral
statutes, were to be in a state of celibacy. They had either to
relinquish their wives or their office.

According to Dean Milman, this statute declares: "That because having a
wife is a troublesome and disturbing affair, and because husbands are
apt to study the washes of their wives, or their mistresses, and no man
can serve two masters, the vergers are to be either bachelors, or to
give up their wives."

Since these times either wives have improved and become less
troublesome, or else the vergers have become less subservient to them,
for at St. Paul's this rule has been abolished. As regards the Reader
of Gray's Inn, it still remains in force.

Unfortunately the chapel is, architecturally speaking, of no
importance. It is low and insignificant, and quite unworthy externally
of the venerable Inn to which it belongs.

Strype, in his edition of "Stowe," much praises the Hall of Gray's Inn,
but laments that the chapel is so small, and wishes the Society would
build a new one raised on arches, so that there would be a good dry
walk underneath them in rainy weather.

The same writer mentions also a new entrance made into Holborn, where
had been erected, he says:

"A fayre Gate and Gatehouse that were great improvements, making a more
convenient and honourable passage, whereof this house stood in much
neede, as the other entrances were rather posterns than gates."

To the shop beneath this gateway a certain interest is attached from
its having been the place of business of Jacob Tonson, the celebrated
bookseller, who removed here from Chancery Lane in 1697.

Several of the most ancient buildings were destroyed by fire in 1604,
and unhappily also nearly all the earliest records of the Society
perished in the same flames.

Subsequently the increasing number of students has necessitated the
demolition of many more of the ancient houses, for some details
respecting them that still exist, describe these old buildings as being
not only dark and ill-convenient, but so deficient in space that the
students had frequently to lodge double.

In 1688 the Inn appears to have been divided into three courts, but two
of these have been thrown into one large area, called Gray's Inn Square.

This same lamentable fire of 1604 destroyed the greater part of the
once valuable library. The present library contains about 13,000
volumes, a large proportion being, of course, works on law. There is
also a small but valuable collection of manuscripts in twenty-four
volumes, some of which are finely illuminated. They mostly relate
to theological subjects, and date from the twelfth to the fifteenth
century. One amongst them, Bracton's "De Legibus et Consuetudinibus
Angliæ," in folio, written about the end of the thirteenth or beginning
of the fourteenth century, was presented to the Society of Gray's Inn
in 1635 by John Godbolt, then Reader of the Inn.




ARCHBISHOP LAUD.


Five Archbishops of Canterbury have been connected with Gray's Inn,
one of whom was the celebrated Laud, Primate of England in 1633, temp.
Charles I.; a man as much loved in domestic and private life for
his kindness, charity, and tenderness, as he was feared, and indeed
hated, as a Churchman and as a statesman, both on account of the rigid
intolerance of his religious opinions, and from the uncompromising
tenacity with which he strove to enforce every right to which he
considered the Church entitled.

Unhappily, this unbending austerity, far from assisting, did but injure
the cause he endeavoured to serve, and his zeal was so ill directed,
that it eventually brought his head to the block, and was one great
cause of the civil and religious war that for so many years desolated
this land.

Animated as he was by the religious fervour of the times, Laud was
inflexible in his resolution of forcing upon all men the adoption of
principles he believed to be right. Even the fatal examples of previous
reigns had not taught him that one of the noblest attributes of
Christianity is forbearance. Great as was his pride, stern and severe
as were his judgments, yet in many respects the Archbishop was a man to
be much respected, even much loved. He considered that his pride as a
Churchman was but a fitting attribute of the great position he held as
Primate of England. He believed that his duty to the Church demanded of
him sternness and severity in dealing with her enemies, and he evinced
the heartfelt sincerity of his opinions by giving up his life in
support of them.

When the end drew near, Laud nobly testified, by the fortitude and
calmness with which he faced death, by the tender thoughtfulness he
showed for all around him, that his pride and severity were but for his
office, that he himself was, as he had ever been, a humble and sincere
Christian.

He has been accused by his enemies of endeavouring to overthrow the
Protestant religion; but one of the best pamphlets ever published
against Roman Catholic tenets was written by Laud in his answer to Dr.
Fisher. His foes also were especially rancorous against him for the
attempts he made to introduce wholesome and lawful games on Sundays
and holy-days; a proceeding viewed with much disfavour by the strict
Puritans of the day, who held that all exercises on the Sabbath, save
those of religion, tended to Popery.

Laud also endeavoured to restrain the publication of irreligious and
other evil books, by subjecting all publications to the revision of
the Star Chamber. This endeavour on the part of the Archbishop caused
a storm of indignation, for it was held to be an attempt to subvert
the existing laws, and to restrain the liberty of the people. The
indiscreet zeal, also, that he displayed in his efforts to introduce
into Scotland the Liturgy of the Church of England, made him many
enemies in that country.

At length, after many years of energetic but fruitless struggles, his
foes prevailed against him; he was committed to the Tower, tried before
a committee of the House of Lords, and condemned to death.

He was beheaded on Tower Hill on the 10th of January, 1641, in the
seventy-second year of his age.

Charles, it is said, though lamenting the death of his old servant,
made no attempt to save the life of one who, though opinionated and
mistaken, had served his King with affectionate fidelity.

Archbishop Laud's only sister married Sir John Robinson, afterwards
Governor of the Tower in the reign of Charles II., and, if we may
believe Pepys, an intimate friend and boon companion of that merry
monarch. The descendants of Lady Robinson, namely, Sir George Robinson
of Cranford, Northamptonshire, Lord Lyveden, of Farming Woods,
Northamptonshire, and John Harvey, of Ickwell-Bury, Bedfordshire, still
possess many interesting relics of this famous prelate.




BISHOP JUXON

AND

ARCHBISHOPS SHELDON & WHITGIFT.


Archbishop Dr. William Juxon was Bishop of London when King Charles I.
was brought to trial, condemned, and executed.

Throughout the civil wars, Juxon had resided at Fulham, and although
his steady adherence and loyalty to the King were well known, the
prelate's meek and inoffensive behaviour and his many charitable works
had gained him the respect of even the most violent of the Puritan and
Republican parties.

When the trial of the Royal martyr commenced, Charles, who early
foresaw its result, especially requested the attendance of Bishop
Juxon; and the ministrations of this good man and truly Christian
divine soothed the unhappy monarch during the terrible hours of his
last days on earth.

Juxon was unwearied in his devotion to his Royal master. He attended
the unhappy monarch on the scaffold; he received the last commissions,
he alone heard the sufferer's last words.

When all was over, the Bishop, at considerable personal risk, took
charge of the mortal remains and conveyed them to Windsor. When there,
however, in spite of urgent remonstrances and earnest entreaties, he
was refused permission by the then Governor, Colonel Whichcote, to
perform the final sad offices over the Royal corpse.

On his return to London, Juxon was thrown into prison for refusing to
divulge the particulars of his conversations with the King; but his
imprisonment was not of long duration, and, when released, he returned
to Fulham Palace, where he was allowed to pass several months in peace.

The following year, however, he was deprived of his bishopric. He
then retired to his own property in Gloucestershire, where he resided
in much privacy until the Restoration. He was then made Archbishop of
Canterbury, and had the satisfaction of placing the crown upon the head
of Charles II.

The Archbishop died in 1663. Few men have left this world more
universally beloved than this excellent prelate; but few men have
equalled him in having consistently led a life as blameless as it was
self-denying--a life made beautiful by exceeding humility, gentleness,
and charity.

He was succeeded in the archbishopric by Gilbert Sheldon, in 1677.
This prelate had formerly been Clerk of the Closet to Charles I., and
had ever adhered faithfully to the King during the troubles of the
Rebellion and the trials of the Royalists during the Commonwealth. At
the Restoration he was made Bishop of London, and subsequently became
Archbishop of Canterbury.

Dr. Sheldon was a man of great learning and of an excellent life. His
charities were numerous and magnificent, and he has also immortalised
his memory by building the famous theatre at Oxford that bears his name.

Another Archbishop of Canterbury connected with Gray's Inn was Dr. John
Whitgift, Primate of England in 1583. A man of very exceptional talent,
eminent alike for the ability of his writings, and for his stirring
eloquence in the pulpit.

By some historians he has been much praised, by others equally blamed;
but it must be remembered that Whitgift lived at a period when
men's minds were agitated and much troubled by religious and civil
contentions, and the great prelate was a violent man amongst violent
partisans.

He was especially noted for his bitter hostility both to the Roman
Catholic party and to that of the Puritans. By each of these religious
bodies he was therefore equally hated and dreaded, and in many
instances his judgments and his actions were harsh and severe; still,
it must also be remembered that at a time when the Church of England
had to contend with many enemies, foreign as well as domestic, and
was menaced with dangers unknown to us in these days, Whitgift held
the reins of government with an able and a vigorous grasp, and to his
credit it can be said that though severe he was never cruel.

This Archbishop was much favoured by Queen Elizabeth, and did many
excellent works of charity, both establishing and assisting large
hospitals for the poor.

In the east window of the chapel at Gray's Inn may be seen the arms
of these prelates, as well as those of William Wake, Archbishop of
Canterbury in 1716. Here, also, are the escutcheons of George Morley,
Bishop of Winchester, Nathaniel Crewe, Bishop of Durham, and of Walker
King, Bishop of Rochester.

Thus we see that this venerable Society exhibits, emblazoned on her
ancient walls, the names and arms of those who, during their lives,
shed such lustre on the sheltering house in which their earliest
struggles were fought.

The children she had so much reason to be proud of honoured her in
their lives. They have gone, but in death she cherishes their memory,
and ever fondly and jealously guards their names from oblivion.

But now, farewell, pleasant old Inn, with all your glorious Past, your
glorious Present, and your glorious Future.

The student, labouring hard to master the difficulties of the
magnificent but stern profession of the Law, must often feel his heart
stir within him with emulation, when he remembers how many are the
celebrated men who have also studied diligently beneath the shelter of
these gray old walls, or who have reposed, perchance, at times beneath
the spreading branches of the grand old trees.

The gates of the Temple of Fame are open to every man, if he can but
win his way up the steep and thorny path that leads to its golden
portals.

None, however, can grapple with the difficulties of the road but the
courageous, the resolute, and the talented.

Woe to him who lingers or faints by the way. To the laggard, as to the
weakly, the shining temple becomes but a glittering mist. It is there,
but unattainable. He who falters or shrinks from the struggle can but
veil his head in grief and disappointment, as those aspirants who are
made of stronger and sterner stuff than himself pass him in the race.

Centuries roll on, generation after generation passes away; but those
who love this venerable and time-honoured Society, trust with heartfelt
affection and gratitude that there will ever be some "Chronicles of
this Old Inn."


CHARLES DICKENS AND EVANS, CRYSTAL PALACE PRESS.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHRONICLES OF AN OLD INN***


******* This file should be named 63844-8.txt or 63844-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/3/8/4/63844


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

